Coronation of Elizabeth II
Coronation portrait by Cecil Beaton, 1953
Date 2 June 1953
Venue Westminster Abbey
Location London, England
Budget £1.57 million (estimates)
ParticipantsQueen Elizabeth II
Great Officers of State
Archbishops and bishops
assistant of the Church of
England
Garter Principal King of Arms
Peers of the Realm
Mistress of the Robes
Coronation of Elizabeth II
The coronation  of Elizabeth II as queen of the United
Kingdom  and the other Commonwealth realms  took
place on 2 June 1953 at Westminster Abbey  in
London . Elizabeth acceded to the throne at the age
of 25 upon the death of her father , Geor ge VI, on 6
February 1952, being proclaimed queen  by her privy
and executive councils shortly afterwards. The
coronation was held more than one year later because
of the tradition of allowing an appropriate length of
time to pass after a monarch dies. It also gave the
planning committees adequate time to make
preparations for the ceremony . During the service,
Elizabeth took an oath, was anointed  with holy oil, was
invested with robes and regalia , and was crowned
Queen of the United Kingdom, Canada , Australia , New
Zealand , South Africa , Pakistan , and Ceylon  (now Sri
Lanka ).
Celebrations took place across the Commonwealth
realms and a commemorative medal  was issued. It was
the first British coronation to be fully televised;
television cameras were not allowed inside the abbey
during her parents' coronation  in 1937. Elizabeth's was
the fourth and final British coronation of the 20th
century . It was estimated to have cost £1.57 million
(pounds).
The one-day ceremony took 14 months of preparation:
the first meeting of the Coronation Commission was in
April 1952, under the chairmanship of the Queen's
husband, Philip, Duke of Edinbur gh. Other
committees were also formed, such as the Coronation
Joint Committee and the Coronation Executive Committee, both chaired by the Duke of Norfolk
who, by convention as earl marshal , had overall responsibility for the event. Many physical
preparations and decorations along the route were the responsibility of David Eccles , Minister of Works.
Eccles described his role and that of the Earl Marshal: "The Earl Marshal is the producer – I am the stage
manager ..." Architect Hugh Casson  designed street decorations for Westminster , and Eric Bedford
designed the Coronation Arches  erected over The Mall.Preparations
A ticket for the stands erected along the
route of the procession to the abbey
through Piccadilly Circus
Coronation invitation designed by Joan
HassallThe committees involved high commissioners  from other
Commonwealth realms, reflecting the international nature of
the coronation; however , officials from other Commonwealth
realms declined invitations to participate in the event because
the governments of those countries considered the ceremony
to be a religious rite unique to Britain. As Canadian Prime
Minister Louis St. Laurent  said at the time: "In my view the
Coronation is the official enthronement of the Sovereign as
Sovereign of the UK. We are happy to attend and witness the
Coronation of the Sovereign of the UK but we are not direct
participants in that function." The Coronation Commission
announced in June 1952 that the coronation would take place
on 2 June 1953.
Invitations for the coronation were designed by the illustrator
Joan Hassall ; she had to use scraperboard  to produce the
final design as there was not enough time to produce a wood
engraving for such a large and complex design. She also
designed the personal invitation that Prince Charles  received
to the coronation.
Norman Hartnell  was commissioned by the Queen to design
the outfits for all members of the royal family , including
Elizabeth's coronation gown . His design for the gown evolved
through nine proposals, and the final version resulted from his
own research and numerous meetings with the Queen: a white
silk dress embroidered with floral emble ms of the countries of
the Commonwealth  at the time: the Tudor rose of England,
Scottish thistle , Welsh leek, shamrock  for Northern Ireland,
wattle  of Australia, maple leaf of Canada, the New Zealand silver fern, South Africa's protea , two lotus
flowers  for India and Ceylon, and Pakistan's wheat, cotton and jute. Roger Vivier created a pair
of gold shoes for the occasion. The sandals featured jewel-encrusted heels and decorative motif on the
upper sides, which was meant to resemble "the fleurs-de-lis pattern on the St Edward's Crown  and the
Imperial State Crown ". Elizabeth chose to wear the Coronation necklace for the event. The piece was
commissioned by Queen Victoria and worn by Queens Alexandra , Mary , and Elizabeth  at their respective
coronations. She paired it with the Coronation earrings.
Elizabeth rehearsed for the occasion with her maids of honour . A sheet was used in place of the velvet
train, and a formation of chairs stood in for the carriage. She also wore the Imperial State Crown while
going about her daily business – at her desk, during tea, and while reading a newspaper – so that she
could become accustomed to its feel and weight. Elizabeth took part in two full rehearsals at
Westminster Abbey , on 22 and 29 May, though some sources claim that she attended one or "several"
rehearsals. The Duchess of Norfolk  usually stood in for the Queen at rehearsals. Westminster
Abbey was closed for five months in preparation for the coronation.
External videos
 Elizabeth is Queen  (htt
ps://www.youtube.com/watch?v=
M5LL8xM85lA) a colour
documentary by British Pathé
The state portrait of Queen Elizabeth II
painted by Sir Herbert James Gunn to
commemorate the coronationElizabeth's grandmother Queen Mary had died on 24 March 1953, having stated in her will that her death
should not affect the planning of the coronation, and the event went ahead as scheduled. It was
estimated to cost £1.57 million , which included stands along the procession
route to accommodate 96,000 people, lavatories, street decorations, outfits, car hire, repairs to the state
coach , and alterations to the Queen's regalia .
The coronation ceremony of Elizabeth II followed a pattern
similar to the coronations of the kings and queens before her,
being held in Westminster Abbey , and involving the peerage  and
clergy. However , for the new queen, several parts of the ceremony
were markedly dif ferent.
Twenty-seven million people across Britain watched the event
live on the BBC Television Service , many having purchased
or rented television sets specifically for that purpose. The
number of license holders  doubled from approximately one
and a half million to three million. The coronation was the
first to be televised in full; the BBC's cameras had not been
allowed inside Westminster Abbey for Queen Elizabeth II's
parents' coronation in 1937 and had covered only the
procession outside. There had been considerable debate
within the British Cabinet  on the subject, with Prime Minister
Winston Churchill  against the idea; Elizabeth refused his
advice on this matter and insisted the event take place before
television cameras, as well as those filming with
experimental 3D technology .[n 1] An experiment in colour
television , separate from the BBC's black and white television
broadcast, was transmitted to children at the Great Ormond
Street Hospital  where an average of 17 people watche d each
small screen.
In Europe, thanks to new relay links, this was the first live
broadcast of an event taking place in the United Kingdom.
The coronation was broadcast in France, Belgium, West
Germany , Denmark, and the Netherlands, marking the birth of
Eurovision .
To make sure Canadians could see it on the same day, Operation Pony Express was executed, seeing
RAF Canberras  fly BBC film recordings  of the ceremony across the Atlantic Ocean  to be broadcast by
the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation  (CBC), the first non-stop flights between the United Kingdom
and the Canadian mainland. At Goose Bay, Labrador , the first batch of film was transferred  to a Royal
Canadian Air Force  CF-100  jet fighter for the further trip to Montreal . In all, three such flights were madeEvent
Television
A programme for Queen Elizabeth II's
coronation; photo of the programme
taken at the Winterthur Museum, Garden
and Library in 2019.as the coronation proceeded, with the first and second
Canberras taking the second and third batches of film,
respectively , to Montreal. The following day, a film was
flown west to Vancouver , where the CBC Television affiliate
had yet to sign on. The film was escorted by the Royal
Canadian Mounted Police  to the Peace Arch Border Crossing ,
after which it was escorted by the Washington State Patrol  to
Bellingham , where it was shown as the inaugural broadcast of
KVOS-TV , a new station whose signal reached into the
Lower Mainland  of British Columbia , allowing viewers there
to see the coronation as well, though on a one-day delay .
US networks NBC  and CBS  made similar arrangements to
have films flown in relays back to the United States for same-
day broadcast, but they used slower propeller -driven aircraft.
NBC had originally planned to carry the event live via
skywave  direct from the BBC. However , the station was
unable to establish a broadcast-quality video link on
coronation day, due to poor atmospher ic conditions. The
struggling ABC  network arranged to re-transmit the CBC
broadcast, taking the on-the-air signal from the CBC's
Toronto station and feeding the network from WBEN-TV ,
Buffalo's lone television station at the time; as a result, ABC beat the other two networks to air by more
than 90 minutes and at considerably lower cost. However , the Canadian broadcast was the first in North
America, viewers in eastern Canada watching the ceremony a half hour before Americans did.
Although it did not as yet have a full-time television service, film was also dispatched to Australia aboard
a Qantas  airliner , which arrived in Sydney in a record time of 53 hours 28 minutes. The worldwide
television audience for the coronation was estimated to be 277 million. Additionally , 11 million in the
UK listened to the broadcast on radio.
Along a route lined with sailors, soldiers, and airmen and women from across the British Empire  and
Commonwealth,[n 2] guests and officials passed in a procession before about three million spectators
that were gathered on the streets of London , some having camped overnight in their spot to ensure a view
of the monarch, and others having access to specially built stands and scaffolding along the route. For
those not present, more than 200 microphones were stationed along the path and in Westminster Abbey ,
with 750 commentators broadcasting in 39 languages.
The procession included foreign royalty and heads of state riding to Westminster Abbey in various
carriages, so many that volunteers rangi ng from wealthy businessmen to rural landowners were required
to supplement the insuf ficient ranks of regular footmen. The first royal coach left Buckingham Palace
and moved down the Mall , which was filled with flag-waving and cheering crowds. It was followed by
the Irish State Coach  carrying Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother , who wore the circlet of her crown
bearing the Koh-i-Noor  diamond. Queen Elizabeth II proceed ed through London from Buckingham
Palace, through Trafalgar Square , and towards the abbey in the Gold State Coach  drawn by eight greyProcession
A silk banner that was displayed in
Westminster Abbey featuring a crowned
garter and the cypher EIIR
The chairs used at the coronationgeldings. The Royal Mews  staff placed a hot water bottle
under the coach's seat to keep the Queen and the Duke of
Edinbur gh warm. Attached to the shoulders of her dress,
the Queen wore the Robe of State, a 6-yard (5.5 m) long,
hand woven silk velvet  cloak lined with Canadian ermine  that
required the assistance of her maids of honour — Lady Jane
Vane-T empest-Stewart , Lady Anne Coke , Lady Moyra
Hamilton , Lady Mary Baillie-Hamilton , Lady Jane
Heathcote-Drummond-W illoughby , Lady Rosemary Spencer -
Churchill  and the Duchess of Devonshire—to carry .
The return procession followed a route that was 5.1 miles
(8.2 km) in length, passing along Whitehall , across Trafalgar
Square, along Pall Mall  and Piccadilly  to Hyde Park Corner ,
via Marble Arch  and Oxford Circus , down Regent Street  and
Haymarket , and finally along the Mall to Buckingham Palace.
29,000 service personnel from Britain and across the
Commonwealth marched in a procession that was 2 miles
(3.2 km) long and took 45 minutes to pass any given point. A
further 15,800 lined the route. The parade was led by Colonel Burrows of the War Office staff and
four regimental bands. Then came the colonial contingents, then troops from the Commonwealth realms,
followed by the Royal Air Force , the British Army , the Royal Navy , and finally the Household
Brigade . Behind the marching troops was a carriage procession led by the rulers of the British
protectorates, including Queen Sālote Tupou III of Tonga, the Commonwealth prime ministers, the
princes and princesses of the blood royal, and Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother . Preceded by the heads
of the British Armed Forces  on horseback, the Gold State Coach was escorted by the Yeomen of the
Guard  and the Household Cavalry  and was followed by the Queen's aides-de-camp . So many carriages
were required that some had to be borrowed from Elstree Studios .
After the end of the procession, the royal family appeared on the balcony of Buckingham Palace to watch
a flypast . The flypast had been altered on the day due to the bad weather , but otherwise took place as
planned. 168 jet fighters flew overhead in three divisions thirty seconds apart, at an altitude of 1,500
feet.[n 3]
After being closed since the Queen's accession for coronation
preparations, Westminster Abbey was opened at 6 am on
Coronation Day to the approximately 8,000 guests invited
from across the Commonwealth of Nations ;[n 4] more
prominent individuals, such as members of the Queen's
family and foreign royalty , the peers of the United Kingdom ,
heads of state, members of Parliament  from the Queen's
various legislatures, and the like, arrived after 8:30 a.m.
Queen Sālote  of Tonga  was a guest, and was noted for her
cheery demeanour while riding in an open carriage through
London in the rain. General Geor ge Marshall , the formerGuests
Members of the royal family at the
coronation, including the four-year-old
Prince Charles (centre right)United States secretary of state who implemented the Marshall Plan, was appointed chairman of the US
delegation to the coronation and attended the ceremony along with his wife, Katherine.
Among other dignitaries who attended the event were Sir Winston Churchill; the prime ministers of
Burma, India and Pakistan, U Nu, Jawaharlal Nehru  and Mohammad Ali Bogra ; and Col Anastasio
Somoza Debayle  of Nicaragua. 129 nations and territories were represented by their dignitaries at the
service. Foreign and Commonwealth representatives were also invited to two banquets hosted by the
Queen at Buckingham Palace.
The Queen later revealed that some peers had hidden sandwiches underneath their coronets to fuel them
through the three-hour ceremony . Guests seated on stools were able to purchase their stools following
the ceremony , with the profits going towards the cost of the coronation.
Preceding the Queen into Westminster Abbey was the
coronation regalia , including the Second Sword, carried by
the Earl of Home , Curtana  carried by the Duke of
Northumberland , the Third Sword carried by the Duke of
Buccleuch and Queensbury  and St Edward's Crown , carried
into the abbey by the Lord High Steward of England , the
Lord Cunningham of Hyndhope  flanked by two other peers.
The archbishops  and bishops assistant (Durham and Bath and
Wells) of the Church of England , in their copes  and mitres ,
waited outside the Great West Door for Queen Elizabeth II's
arrival. When she arrived at about 11:00 am, she found
that the friction between her robes and the carpet caused her
difficulty moving forward, and she said to the Archbishop of
Canterbury , Geof frey Fisher , "Get me started!" Once going, the procession, which included the
various high commissioners  of the Commonwealth carrying banner s bearing the shields of the coats of
arms of their respective nations, moved inside the abbey , up the central aisle and through the choir to
the stage, as the choirs sang I was glad, an imperial setting of Psalm 122, vv. 1–3, 6, and 7 by Sir Hubert
Parry . As Elizabeth prayed at and then seated  herself on the Chair of Estate to the south of the altar,
the bishops carried in the religious paraphernalia—the Bible , paten  and chalice —and the peers holding
the coronation regalia handed them over to the archbishop of Canterbury , who, in turn, passed them to the
dean of Westminster , Alan Don , to be placed on the altar .
After she moved to stand before King Edward's Chair , Elizabeth turned, following as Fisher , along with
the Lord High Chancellor of Great Britain , the Lord Simonds ; the Lord Great Chamberlain of England ,
the Marquess of Cholmondeley ; the Lord High Constable of England , the Viscount Alanbrooke ; and the
Earl Marshal of England , the Duke of Norfolk ; all led by Garter Principal King of Arms  Geor ge Bellew .
The Archbishop of Canterbury asked the audience in each direction of the compass separately: "Sirs, I
here present unto you Queen Elizabeth, your undoubted Queen: wherefore all you who are come this day
to do your homage and service, are you willing to do the same?" The crowd  would reply "God save
Queen Elizabeth!" every time, to each of which the Queen would curtsey in return.Ceremony
Elizabeth proceeding past the Coronation
Chair, the darker chair at right
St Edward's Crown, the Orb, the Sceptre
with Cross, Sceptre with Dove, and the
RingSeated again on the Chair of Estate, Elizabeth then took the
coronation oath as administered by the archbisho p of
Canterbury . In the lengthy oath, she swore to govern each of
her countries according to their respective laws and customs,
to mete out law and justice with mercy , to uphold
Protestantism  in the United Kingdom and protect the Church
of England and preserve its bishops and clergy. She
proceeded to the altar where she stated, "The things which I
have here promised, I will perform, and keep. So help me
God", before kissing the Bible and putting the royal sign-
manual  to the oath as the Bible was returned to the dean of
Westminster . From him the Moderator of the General
Assembly of the Church of Scotland , James Pitt-W atson, took
the Bible and presented it to Elizabeth again, saying,
Our gracious Queen: to keep your Majesty ever
mindful of the law and the Gospel of God as the
Rule for the whole life and government of Christian
Princes, we present you with this Book, the most
valuable thing that this world affords. Here is
Wisdom; This is the royal Law; These are the lively
Oracles of God.
Elizabeth returned the book to Pitt-W atson, who placed it back with the dean of Westminster .
The communion  service was then conducted, invol ving
prayers by both the clergy and Elizabeth, Fisher asking, "O
God... Grant unto this thy servant Elizabeth, our Queen, the
spirit of wisdom and government, that being devoted unto
thee with her whole heart, she may so wisely govern, that in
her time thy Church may be in safety , and Christian devotion
may continue in peace", before reading various excerpts from
the First Epistle of Peter , Psalms, and the Gospel of
Matthew . Elizabeth was then anointed as the choir sang
Zadok the Priest ; the Queen's jewellery and crimson cape
were removed by the Earl of Ancaster  and the Mistress of the
Robes , the Duchess of Devonshire and, wearing only a
simple, white linen dress also designed by Hartnell to
completely cover the coronation gown, she moved to be
seated in King Edward's Chair . There, Fisher , assisted by the Dean of Westminster , made a cross on her
forehead, hands and breast with holy oil made from the same base as had been used in the coronation of
her father . A gold canopy borne aloft by four Knights of the Garter on poles shielded her, and at her
request, the anointing ceremony was not televised.
The Duke of Edinburgh swearing
allegiance to his wifeFrom the altar, the dean passed to the Lord Great Chamberlain the spurs , which were presented to
Elizabeth and then placed back on the altar. The Sword of State  was then handed to Elizabeth, who, after
a prayer was uttered by Fisher , placed it herself on the altar, and the peer who had been previously
holding it took it back again after paying a sum of 100 shillings . Elizabeth was then invested with the
Armills  (bracelets), Stole Royal , Robe Royal  and the Sovereign's Orb, followed by the Sovereign's Ring ,
the Sovereign's Sceptre with Cross  and the Sovereign's Sceptre with Dove . With the first two items on
and in her right hand and the latter in her left, Queen Elizabeth II was crowned by the archbishop of
Canterbury , with the crowd chanting "God save the Queen!" three times at the exact moment St Edward's
Crown touched the monarch's head. The princes and peers gathered then put on their coronets and a 21-
gun salute  was fired from the Tower of London .
With the benediction read, Elizabeth moved to the throne and
the archbishop of Canterbury and all the bishops offered to
her their fealty , after which, while the choir sang, the peers of
the United Kingdom—led by the royal peers: Elizabeth's
husband; her uncle the Duke of Gloucester ; and her cousin
the Duke of Kent —each proceeded, in order of precedenc e, to
pay their personal homage and allegiance. After the royal
peers, the 5 most senior peers, one for each rank, offered their
fealty as representatives of the peerage of the United
Kingdom: Norfolk for Dukes and Duchesses, the Marquess
Huntly  for Marquesses and Marchionesses, the Earl of
Shrewsbury  for Earls and Countesses, the Viscount of Arbuthnott  for Viscounts and Viscountesses and the
Lord Mowbray  for Barons and Baronesses.
When the last Baron had completed this task, the assembly shouted "God save Queen Elizabeth. Long
live Queen Elizabeth. May the Queen live for ever!" Having removed all her royal regalia, Elizabeth
knelt and took the communion, includ ing a general confession  and absolution , and, along with the
congregation, recited the Lord's Prayer .
Now wearing the Imperial State Crown and holding the Sceptre with the Cross and the Orb, and as the
gathered guests sang "God Save the Queen ", Elizabeth left Westminster Abbey through the nave and
apse, out the Great West Door .
Although many had assumed that the master of the queen's music , Sir Arnold Bax, would be the director
of music for the coronation, it was decid ed instead to appoint the organist and master of the choristers at
the abbey , William McKie , who had been in charge of music at the royal wedding  in 1947. McKie
convened an advisory committee with Sir Arnold Bax and Sir Ernest Bullock , who had directed the music
for the previous coronation.
When it came to choosing the music, tradition required that Handel 's Zadok the Priest  and Parry's I was
glad were included amongst the anthems . Other choral works included were the anonymous 16th century
anthem "Rejoice in the Lord alway" and Samuel Sebastian Wesley 's Thou wilt keep him in perfect peace .
Another tradition was that new works be commissioned from the leading composers of the day: Ralph
Vaughan Williams  composed a new motet O Taste and See, William Walton  composed a setting for the Te
Deum , and the Canadian composer Healey Willan wrote an anthem O Lord our Governor . FourMusic
Appearance of the royal family on the
balcony of Buckingham Palace after the
coronationnew orchestral pieces were planned; Arthur Bliss  composed
Processional ; Walton, Orb and Sceptr e; and Arnold Bax,
Coronation March. Benjamin Britten  had agreed to compose
a piece, but he caught influenza and then had to deal with
flooding at Aldebur gh, so nothing was forthcoming. Edward
Elgar 's Pomp and Circumstance March No. 1 in D was played
immediately before Bax's march at the end of the
ceremony . An innovation, at the suggestion of Vaughan
Williams, was the inclusion of a hymn in which the
congregation could participate. This proved controversial and
was not included in the programme until Elizabeth had been
consulted and found to be in favour; Vaughan Williams wrote
an elaborate arrangement of the traditional metrical psalm , the
Old Hundr edth, which included military trumpet fanfares and
was sung before the communion. Gordon Jacob  wrote a choral arrangement of God Save the
Queen , also with trumpet fanfares.
The choir for the coronation was a combination of the choirs of Westminster Abbey , St Paul's Cathedral ,
the Chapel Royal , and Saint Geor ge's Chapel, Windsor . In addition to those established choirs, the Royal
School of Church Music  conducted auditions to find twenty boy trebles  from parish church  choirs
representing the various regions of the United Kingdom. Along with twelve trebles chosen from various
British cathedral  choirs, the selected boys spent the month beforehand training at Addington Palace .
The final complement of choristers comprised 182 boy trebles, 37 male altos, 62 tenors and 67 basses.
The orchestra, of 60 players, was drawn from the leading members of British symphony orchestras and
chamber ensembles. Each of the 18 violinists, headed by Paul Beard , was the leader  of a major orchestra
or chamber group. The conductor was Sir Adrian Boult , who had conducted the orchestra at the previous
coronation.
The Queen's Coronation Day broadcast
The Queen's speech to the Commonwealth and Empire in the evening of her Coronation Day
Problems playing this file? See media help.
In the evening on 2 June, the Queen made a live radio broadcast  to thank the public. All across the
Queen's realms, the rest of the Commonwealth, and in other parts of the world , coronation celebrations
were held. The British government announced an extra bank holiday  that fell on 3 June and moved the
last bank holiday in May to 2 June to allow for an extended time of celebrations . The Queen Elizabeth
II Coronation Medal  was also presented to thousands of recipients throughout the Queen's realms and in
Canada, New Zealand, South Africa, and the UK, commemorative coins were issued. Three million
bronze coronation medallions were ordered by the Canadian government, struc k by the Royal Canadian
Mint  and distributed to schoolchildren across the country; the obverse showed Eliza beth's effigy and the
reverse the royal cypher  above the word CANADA , all circumscribed by ELIZABETH II REGINA
CORONA TA MCMLIII .Celebrations, monuments, and media
0:000:00
/ 0:00/ 0:00

Australian stamp issued for the
coronation of Queen Elizabeth II
A plaque marking a tree planted in the
United Kingdom to commemorate the
coronation of Queen Elizabeth II
A street celebration in Hong Kong for the
coronation of Queen Elizabeth II in 1953
A stand of trees near Monmouth in south
Wales, planted in the form of the letters
E R (Elizabeth Regina) to commemorate
the coronation of Queen Elizabeth IIAs at the coronation of Geor ge VI, acorns shed from oaks in
Windsor Great Park, near Windsor Castle , were shipped
around the Commonwealth and planted in parks, school
grounds, cemeteries and private gardens to grow into what are
known as Royal Oaks  or Coronation Oaks .
In London, the Queen hosted a coronation luncheon, for
which the recipe coronation chicken  was devised, and a
fireworks show was mounted on Victoria Embankment .
Further , street parties were mounted around the United
Kingdom. The Coronation Cup football tournament was held
at Hampden Park, Glasgow  in May, and two weeks before
the coronation, the children's literary magazine Collins
Magazine  rebranded itself as The Young Elizabethan .
News that Edmund Hillary  and Tenzing Norgay had reached
the summit  of Mount Everest  arrived in Britain on Elizabeth's
coronation day; the New Zealand, American, and British
media dubbed it "a coronation gift for the new Queen". In
the following month, a pageant took place over the River
Thames  as a coronation tribute to the Queen.
Military tattoos , horse races, parades, and fireworks displays
were mounted in Canada. The country's Governor General ,
Vincent Massey , proclaimed the day a national holiday and
presided over
celebrations on
Parliament Hill in
Ottawa , where the
Queen's
coronation speech
was broadcast and
her personal royal
standard flown
from the Peace
Tower .
Later , a public
concert was held
on Parliament Hill
and the Governor General hosted a ball at Rideau Hall. In
Newfoundland, 90,000 boxes of sweets were given to
children, some having theirs delivered by Royal Canadian Air Force  drops, and, in Quebec , 400,000
people turned out in Montreal, some 100,000 at Jeanne-Mance Park alone. A multicultural  show was put
on at Exhibition Place  in Toronto , square dances and exhibitions took place in the Prairie provinces , and,
in Vancouver , the Chinese community  performed a public lion dance . On the Korean Peninsula ,
Canadian soldiers serving in the Korean War acknowledged the day by firing red, white, and blue
coloured smoke shells  at the enemy and drank rum rations.
Warships from Sweden (right) and the
Soviet Union (left) at the fleet review
The Crown of ScotlandA documentary film of the coronation, A Queen Is Crowned , narrated by Laurence Olivier , was one of the
most popular films in British cinemas that year. It was nominated for the Academy Award for Best
Documentary Feature  and was the first winner of the Golden Globe Award for Best Docum entary
Film .
On 15 June 1953, the Queen attended a fleet review  at
Spithead , off the coast at Portsmouth . Commanded by
Admiral Sir Geor ge Creasy  were 197 Royal Navy warships,
together with 13 from the Commonwealth and 16 from
foreign navies, as well as representative vessels from the
British Merchant Navy  and Fishing Fleets. There were
more British and Commonwealth naval ships present than at
the 1937 coronation review , though a third of them were
frigates  or smaller vessels. Major Royal Navy units included
Britain's last battleship , HMS Vanguar d, and four fleet and
three light aircraft carriers . The Royal Australian Navy  and
the Royal Canadian Navy  also each included a light carrier in their contingents, HMAS Sydney  and
HMCS Magnificent .
Using the frigate HMS Surprise  as a royal yacht , the Queen and royal family started to review the lines of
anchored ships at 3:30 p.m., finally anchoring at 5:10 p.m. This was followed by a fly-past of Fleet
Air Arm aircraft. Forty naval air squadrons participated, with 327 aircraft flying from  four naval air
stations; the formation was led by Rear Admiral Walter Couchman  flying a de Havilland Sea Vampire .
After the Queen transferred to Vanguar d for dinner , the day concluded with the Illumination of the fleet
and a fireworks display .
During a week-long visit to Scotland, on 24 June 1953, the
Queen attended a national service of thanksgiving  at St Giles'
Cathedral , Edinbur gh, during which she was ceremonially
presented with the Honours of Scotland , the Scottish crown
jewels. Following a carriage procession through the city
escorted by the Royal Company of Archers , the service,
led by the Moderator of the General Assembly of the Church
of Scotland , James Pitt-W atson , was attended by a
congregation of 1,700 drawn from all sections of Scottish
society . The high point of the event was the presentation
of the Honours, which the Queen received from the Dean of
the Thistle , Charles Warr, and then passed the Crown of
Scotland  to the Duke of Hamilton , the Sword of State to theLater  events
Coronation Review of the Fleet
Honours of Scotland
Earl of Home , and the Sceptre to the Earl of Crawford and Balcarres . It was the first time that this
ceremony had been enacted since 1822 during the visit of King Geor ge IV .
The Queen was dressed in "day clothes" complete with a handbag, rather than in ceremonial robes, which
was taken as a slight to Scotland's dignity by the Scottish press. The decision not to dress formally
was made by the Private Secretary to the Sovereign , Sir Alan Lascelles , and Sir Austin Strutt, a senior
civil servant at the Home Office, to avoid the service being interpreted as a coronation . In the official painting of the ceremon y by
Stanley Cursiter , the of fending handbag was tactfully omitted.
On 15 July 1953, the Queen attended a review of the Royal Air Force at RAF Odiham  in Hampshire .
The first part of the review was a march past by contingents representing the various commands of the
RAF, with Bomber Command  leading. This was followed by four de Havilland Venoms  of the Central
Fighter Establishment  making the Royal Cypher  in skywriting . After lunch, the Queen in an open car
toured the lines of some 300 aircraft that were arranged in a static display . She returned to the central dias
for the flypast of 640 British and Com monwealth aircraft, of which 440 were jet-powered. The flypast
was led by a Bristol Sycamore  helicopter which was towing a large RAF Ensign , while the final aircraft
was a prototype Supermarine Swift  flown by test pilot Mike Lithgow . Finally , the skywriting Venoms
spelled out the word "vivat".
List of participants in the coronation procession of Elizabeth II
1953 Coronation Honours
The Queen's Beasts , heraldic statues placed outside W estminster Abbey representing
Elizabeth's genealogy
Canadian Coronation Contingent
All the Elizabeths
Coronation of Charles III and Camilla
1. This footage was in 2010 used in the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation 's first 3D
television  broadcast, the first time the images had been shown on television.
2. Including 856 representing the Canadian Army , Royal Canadian Navy , and Royal Canadian
Air Force .
3. The aircraft were 144 Gloster Meteors  of the Royal Air Force and 24 Canadair Sabres  of the
Royal Canadian Air Force, commanded by Air V ice Marshal the Earl of Bandon , who would
later organise the larger RAF Coronation Review flypast in July .
4. From Canada came the prime minister , Louis St. Laurent , and five other members of the
federal Cabinet , the chief justice , the speakers of the House of Commons  and Senate , the
leaders of Her Majesty's Loyal Opposition  in the same two houses, and the leader of the
Government in the Senate , Lieutenant Governor of Ontario  Louis Breithaupt  and his
premier , Leslie Frost , as well as Premier of Saskatchewan  Tommy Douglas , QuebecCoronation Review of the RAF
See also
Notes
Cabinet ministers  Onésime Gagnon  and John Samuel Bourque , Mayor of Toronto  Allan
A. Lamport , and Chief of the Squamish Nation  Joe Mathias .
1. "1953: Queen Elizabeth takes coronation oath"   . BBC News . 2 June 1953 . Retrieved 29 May
2018 .
2. "60 Fascinating Facts About The Queen's Coronation"   . Royal Central . 1 June 2013. Archived    from the original on 17 July 2020.
3. "The coronation and visit of Queen Elizabeth II"  (https://collections.tepapa.govt.nz/topic/243
2). Museum of New Zealand . New Zealand Government . Retrieved 4 May  2024 .
4. Bousfield, Arthur; Toffoli, Gary . Fifty Years the Queen  (https://books.google.com/book
s?id=w8l5reK7NjoC) . Toronto: Dundurn Press. p. 74. ISBN  978-1-55002-360-2 .
5. Bousfield 2002 , p. 100
6. "Coronation June 2 Next Year"  . The Glasgow Herald . 29 April 1952 –
via Google News.
7. "Family's Ancient Right to Prepare for Coronation"   . The Age. 2 June
1953 – via Google News.
8. "Staging Coronation Complex Problem"   . Ottawa Citizen . 1 June 1953 –
via Google News.
9. Herbert, A. P. . "Here Comes the Queen"  (https://books.google.com/books?id
=KUkEAAAAMBAJ&q=david+eccles+earl+marshal+newspaper&pg=P A98) . Life. p. 98 .
Retrieved 19 March  2016 .
10. "Sir Hugh Casson and the coronation"  (https://www .architecture.com/explore-architecture/in
side-the-riba-collections/casson-and-the-coronation) . Royal Institute of British Architects .
Retrieved 4 May  2024 .
11. Trepanier , Peter . "A  Not Unwilling Subject: Canada and Her Queen". In Coates, Colin
M. (ed.). Majesty in Canada  (https://books.google.com/books?id=FhFyvhpPx8MC) .
Hamilton: Dundurn Press. pp. 144– 145. ISBN  9781550025866 . Retrieved 16 October  2012 .
12. Bousfield 2002 , p. 77
13. Andersson, Jasmine; Seddon, Sean . "Coronation invitations through the
ages"   . BBC News .
14. Hartnell, Sir Norman  . "'Silver and Gold' by Norman Hartnell"  (https://www .va
m.ac.uk/articles/silver-and-gold-by-norman-hartnell) . Victoria and Albert Museum .
15. Thomas, Pauline W eston . "Dress Queen Elizabeth Coronation Gown"  (http://
www .fashion-era.com/coronation_dress.htm) . Fashion-Era .
16. Cotton, Belinda; Ramsey , Ron. "By Appointment: Norman Hartnell's sample for the
Coronation dress of Queen Elizabeth II"   . National Gallery of Australia. Archived from the original  (http://
www .nga.gov .au/ByAppointment/)  on 30 May 2012 . Retrieved 12 February  2010 .
17. Newbold, Alice . "The Queen's Coronation Shoes Are Making A Comeback 67
Years Later"  (https://www .vogue.co.uk/news/article/queen-elizabeth-coronation-shoes-roger-
vivier) . British V ogue . Retrieved 26 September  2022 .Refer ences
18. "The Coronation necklace 1858 – 1911"  (https://www .rct.uk/collection/themes/exhibitions/a-r
oyal-welcome/buckingham-palace/the-coronation-necklace) . Royal Collection T rust.
Retrieved 26 September  2022 .
19. McDowell, Colin . A Hundred Years of Royal Style  (https://archive.org/details/hundred
yearsofro00mcdo/page/70) . London: Muller , Blond & White. p. 70 (https://archive.org/details/
hundredyearsofro00mcdo/page/70) . ISBN  978-0-584-11071-5 .
20. Bradford, Sarah . Elizabeth: A Biography of Britain's Queen  (https://archive.or
g/details/elizabethbiograp00brad_0/page/186) . London: Riverhead Trade. p. 186 (https://arc
hive.org/details/elizabethbiograp00brad_0/page/186) . ISBN  978-1-57322-600-4 .
21. Brooke-Little, John . Royal Ceremonies of State . London: Littlehampton Book
Services Ltd. p. 52. ISBN  978-0-600-37628-6 .
22. "Diamond brooch given by Queen Elizabeth II as a thank-you for coronation duties"   . Antiques T rade Gazette . 30
May 2022 . Retrieved 20 June  2022 .
23. "Tomorrow , Westminster Abbey will be the location for the first coronation in 70 years. Take
a look at some of the work that has gone into preparing the Abbey for the ceremony"  (http
s://www .instagram.com/p/Cr3cV y-ACEw/?hl=en) . Westminster Abbey . 5 May 2023 .
Retrieved 5 May  2023  – via Instagram.
24. United Kingdom Gross Domestic Product deflator  figures follow the MeasuringWorth
"consistent series" supplied in Thomas, Ryland; Williamson, Samuel H. . "What W as
the U.K. GDP  Then?"  (http://www .measuringworth.com/datasets/ukgdp/) . MeasuringWorth .
Retrieved 15 July  2024 .
25. Morris, Bob . Inaugurating a New Reign: Planning for Accession and Coronation .
University College London. pp. 23–24. ISBN  978-1-903903-82-7 .
26. Range, Matthias . British Royal and State Funerals: Music and Ceremonial Since
Elizabeth I  (https://books.google.com/books?id=Kn1FDAAAQBAJ) . Boydell & Brewer .
p. 286. ISBN  978-1-78327-092-7 .
27. "Coronations and the Royal Archives"   . The Royal Family . Archived from the original  (http
s://www .royal.uk/royal-archives-coronation)  on 18 April 2023 . Retrieved 5 April 2023 .
28. BBC Handbook 1938 . London: British Broadcasting Corporation. 1938. pp. 38–39.
29. Mills, Rhiannon . "Hundreds come forward to claim a role in King
Charles's coronation"   . Sky News . Retrieved 28 January  2023 .
30. "The Coronation of Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II"   . Historic UK . Retrieved 20 December  2009 .
31. Szklarski, Cassandra . "Put on those specs, couch potatoes – 3D poised to
reinvent TV: tech guru"   . News1130. Archived from the original  
on 17 July 2011 . Retrieved 11 August  2010 .
32. "Early Color Television: British Experimental Field Sequential Color System"  (http://www .earl
ytelevision.org/british_experimental.html) . Early Television Museum . Retrieved 23 June
2012 .
33. "Television reigns: Broadcasting Queen Elizabeth's coronation"  (https://www .sciencemuseu
m.org.uk/objects-and-stories/television-reigns-broadcasting-queen-elizabeths-coronation) .
Science Museum . 29 October 2018. Archived    from the original on 3 January 2020.
34. Woolf, Marie . "Mounties to feature in King's slimmed-down coronation
procession"  (https://www .theglobeandmail.com/politics/article-mounties-to-feature-in-kings-sl
immed-down-coronation-procession/) . The Globe and Mail . Retrieved 13 April 2023 .
35. Canadian Broadcasting Corporation . "Society > The Monarchy > Canada's New Queen >
Coronation of Queen Elizabeth > The Story"  (http://archives.cbc.ca/society/monarchy/topics/
70/). CBC . Retrieved 17 December  2009 .
36. "Society > The Monarchy > Canada's New Queen > Coronation of Queen Elizabeth > Did
You Know?"  (http://archives.cbc.ca/society/monarchy/topics/70/) . Canadian Broadcasting
Corporation . Retrieved 17 December  2009 .
37. Staff, TV Insider . "TV Guide Throwback: How The Queen's Coronation
Was Televised in 1953"   . TV Insider . Retrieved 10 September  2022 .
38. "Fifty Years Ago – 1953"  (http://www .airwaysmuseum.com/Fifty%20years%20ago%20-%201
953.htm) . airwaysmuseum.com . The Civil Aviation Historical Society & Airways Museum.
2003 . Retrieved 12 August  2018 .
39. Davison, Janet . "Queen's coronation made history for Canada – and for
television"   . www .cbc.ca . CBC News . Retrieved 12 August  2018 .
40. "50 facts about The Queen's Coronation"  (https://www .royal.uk/50-facts-about-queens-coron
ation-0) . The Royal Family . Retrieved 17 March  2023 .
41. McCreery , Christopher  . Commemorative Medals of The Queen's Reign in Canada,
1952–2012  (https://books.google.com/books?id=A vMe9W1B6_8C) . Toronto: Dundurn
Press. p. 49. ISBN  9781459707580 .
42. "On This Day > 2nd June > 1953: Queen Elizabeth takes coronation oath"   . British Broadcasting
Corporation. 2 June 1953 . Retrieved 19 December  2009 .
43. "The Gold State Coach"  (https://www .rct.uk/visit/the-royal-mews-buckingham-palace/the-gol
d-state-coach#/) . Royal Collection T rust. Retrieved 10 April 2023 .
44. Sampson, Annabel . "Lady Anne Glenconner's memoir reveals her as the
ultimate in royal companions"  (https://www .tatler .com/article/lady-anne-glenconner-lady-in-w
aiting-princess-margaret) . Tatler. Archived    from
the original on 8 November 2019.
45. Glenconner , Anne  . "4". Lady in waiting : my extraordinary life in the shadow of the
crown . Hodder & Stoughton. ISBN  9781529359084 .
46. Arlott, John and others  Elizabeth Crowned Queen , Odhams Press Limited (pp. 15–
25)
47. "The Ceremonial of the Coronation of Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II"    (PDF) . Supplement to the London
Gazette . 17 November 1952. pp. 6253– 6263. Archived from the original  (http://www .thediam
ondjubilee.org/sites/www .thediamondjubilee.org/files/Ceremonial%20of%20the%20Coronati
on_0.pdf)  (PDF)  on 2 December 2013 . Retrieved 24 November  2013 .
48. London Gazette pp. 6264–6270
49. Strong 2005, pp. 453
50. Strong 2005, pp. 449–450
51. "168 Jets Roared Over The Palace Balcony"   . Belfast T elegraph . 3 June 1953 . Retrieved 22 June
2022 .
52. McCreery 2012 , p. 48
53. "Society > The Monarchy > Coronation of Queen Elizabeth"   . CBC. Archived    from the original on 27 December 2010 .
Retrieved 4 July  2009 .
54. Brooke-Little 1980 , p. 55
55. Royal Household. "Her Majesty The Queen > Accession and Coronation"  (http://www .royal.g
ov.uk/HMTheQueen/AccessionCoronation/Accessionandcoronation.aspx) . Queen's Printer .
Retrieved 18 December  2009 .
56. "Our Constitution > Timeline > Post 1875 > 1953: Queen Salote attends Queen Elizabeth II
coronation"   . Director and Secretariat to the Constitutional and Electoral
Commission . Retrieved 20 December  2009 .
57. Thompson, Rachel Yarnell . Marshall: A Statesman Shaped in the Crucible of W ar.
Leesburg, V irginia: George C. Marshall International Center . ISBN  9780615929033 .
58. "1953: Leaders and monarchs from around world to attend Queen's state funeral"   . The Guardian . 2 June 1953 . Retrieved 9 September  2022 .
59. Coke, Hope . "Peers advised against crimson robes and coronets for the
coronation"  (https://www .tatler .com/article/coronation-dress-code-no-coronets-robers-peers) .
Tatler. Retrieved 19 April 2023 .
60. Government of Nova Scotia. "The Diamond Jubilee of Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II >
Diamond Jubilee Photos"  (http://gov .ns.ca/iga/djPhoto.asp) . Queen's Printer for Nova
Scotia . Retrieved 29 February  2012 .
61. Bousfield 2002 , p. 78
62. "The Form and Order of Service that is to be performed and the Ceremonies that are to be
observed in the Coronation of Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II in the Abbey Church of St.
Peter , Westminster , on Tuesday , the second day of June, 1953"   . An Anglican Liturgical Library . Retrieved 15 December  2009 .
63. An Anglican Liturgical Library , II
64. An Anglican Liturgical Library , III
65. An Anglican Liturgical Library , IV
66. An Anglican Liturgical Library , V
67. An Anglican Liturgical Library , VI
68. "Coronation 1953: Magic moment the TV cameras missed"   . BBC News . 4 June 2013.
69. An Anglican Liturgical Library , VIII
70. An Anglican Liturgical Library , IX–XI
71. BBC TV Coronation of Queen Elizabeth II: W estminster Abbey 1953 (W illiam McKie)  (http
s://www .youtube.com/watch?v=52NTjasbmgw) . Archive of Recorded Church Music. 2 June
2018. Event occurs at 1:44:20 . Retrieved 26 September  2022 .
72. An Anglican Liturgical Library , XII–XIV
73. An Anglican Liturgical Library , XV
74. Wilkinson, James . The Queen's Coronation: The Inside Story . Scala Publishers Ltd.
p. 24. ISBN  978-1-85759-735-6 .
75. Wilkinson 2011 , p. 27
76. Wilkinson 2011 , p. 28
77. Wilkinson 2011 , p. 25
78. Range, Matthias . Music and Ceremonial at British Coronations: From James I to
Elizabeth II  (https://books.google.com/books?id=_rIgA wAAQBAJ&q=Gordon+Jacob+%22G
od+Save+the+Queen%22&pg=P A323) . Cambridge University Press. pp. 256– 257.
ISBN  978-1-107-02344-4 .
79. "RSCM choristers at the Queen's Coronation in 1953"   . The Royal School of
Church Music. Archived from the original  (http://www .rscm.com/info_resources/news/Corona
tion.php)  on 10 January 2014 . Retrieved 10 January  2014 .
80. "Coronation Orchestra". The T imes . 18 May 1953. p. 11.
81. Andersson, Jasmine . "Extra bank holiday approved to mark King's
coronation"   . BBC News . Retrieved 6 November
2022 .
82. "The Coronation Crown Collection"   . Coincraft. Archived from
the original    on 8
July 2011 . Retrieved 14 January  2010 .
83. McCreery 2012 , p. 51
84. Whiting, Marguerite . "Royal Acorns"    (PDF) . Trillium . Spring 2008.
Parkhill: Ontario Horticultural Association: 13. Archived from the original    (PDF)  on 21 November 2008 . Retrieved 3 July
2009 .
85. "Coronation Chicken recipe"   . British Broadcasting Corporation. 2 June 2003 . Retrieved
19 December  2009 .
86. Melman, Billie . The Culture of History: English Uses of the Past 1800–1953 . New
York: Oxford University Press. p. 284. ISBN  978-0-19-929688-0 .
87. "2 of British Team Conquer Everest"   . The New York T imes . Reuters.
2 June 1953. p. 1. Archived from the original    on 15 October 2009 . Retrieved 18 December  2009 .
88. "Royal River Pageant "  (https://www .youtube.com/watch?v=oP4m307ZP1o) . British
Pathé . 13 April 2014 . Retrieved 6 June  2022 .
89. McCreery 2012 , p. 50
90. Government of Nova Scotia. "The Diamond Jubilee of Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II > The
Queen's Personal Canadian Flag"  (http://gov .ns.ca/iga/qpflag.asp) . Queen's Printer for Nova
Scotia . Retrieved 29 February  2012 .
91. Bousfield 2002 , pp. 83–85
92. Thumim, Janet. "The popular cash and culture in the postwar British cinema industry"  (http
s://archive.org/details/Screen_V olume_32_Issue_3/page/n17) . Screen . Vol. 32, no. 3.
p. 259.
93. "The 26th Academy Awards  Nominees and Winners"   . oscars.org . Archived from the original  (http://www .oscars.org/oscars/ceremonies/19
54) on 6 July 2011 . Retrieved 13 April 2023 .
94. "NY Times: A Queen Is Crowned"   . Movies & TV Dept. The New
York T imes . 2011. Archived from the original    on 21 May 2011 . Retrieved 13 April 2023 .
95. "Winners & Nominees Documentary"  (https://www .goldenglobes.com/winners-nominees/doc
umentary) . GoldenGlobes.com . Hollywood Foreign Press Association . Retrieved 13 April
2023 .
96. Thomas, Ray . "Coronation Spithead Fleet Review 1953"  (http://hmsgambia.
org/Spithead.htm) . hmsgambia.org . Retrieved 30 June  2022 .
97. Willmott, H P  . The Last Century of Sea Power: From W ashington to T okyo, 1922–
1945   . Bloomington: Indiana University Press. p. 25. ISBN  978-0-253-35214-9 .
Retrieved 29 July  2014 .
98. Day, A. . "Coronation Review of the Fleet"    (PDF) . Cloud
Observers Association . Retrieved 3 May  2015 .
99. Hobbs, David . "6. A Royal Occasion and the Radical Review"  (https://books.google.c
om/books?id=n7bNDwAAQBAJ&pg=PT127) . The British Carrier Strike Fleet after 1945 .
Barnsley: Seaforth Publishing. ISBN  978-1526785442 .
100. "The Queen and Scotland"  (https://www .royal.uk/queen-and-scotland) . www .royal.uk . The
Royal Household . Retrieved 23 June  2022 .
101. "The Royal Company in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth II"  (https://www .qbgsrca.co.uk/history/
queen-elizabeth-ii/) . www .qbgsrca.co.uk . The Royal Company of Archers . Retrieved 28 June
2022 .
102. "HM The Queen receiving the Honours of Scotland, St Giles Cathedral, Edinburgh, 24 June
1953"   . www .rct.uk . The Royal Collection Trust.
Retrieved 28 June  2022 .
103. "A life in the lens for the Queen of Scots Monarch marks 80th birthday"   . www .heraldscotland.com . Newsquest Media
Group Ltd. 20 April 2006 . Retrieved 28 June  2022 .
104. Hennessy 2007, Ch. 5
105. "From Our Archive: RAF Coronation Review 1953"   . www .forces.net . British Forces Broadcasting Service. 22
December 2016 . Retrieved 23 June  2022 .
106. Wilson, Keith . RAF in Camera: 100 Years on Display  (https://books.google.com/book
s?id=gER1EAAAQBAJ&pg=P A103) . Barnsley , South Yorkshire: Pen & Sword Aviation.
pp. 107– 110. ISBN  978-1526752185 .
Clancy , Laura. "'Queen's Day – TV's Day': the British monarchy and the media industries"   , Contemporary British
History , vol. 33, no. 3 , pp. 427–450.
Feingold, Ruth P . "Every little girl can grow up to be queen: the coronation and The V irgin in
the Garden." Literature & History  22.2 : 73–90.
Hennessy , Peter  . Having it So Good: Britain in the Fifties  (https://books.google.com/b
ooks?id=-e8XDLDMPPQC&pg=PP202) . London: Penguin Books. ISBN  978-0141004099 .
Örnebring, Henrik. "Revisiting the Coronation: a Critical Perspective on the Coronation of
Queen Elizabeth II in 1953." Nordicom Review  25, no. 1-2 online  (http://www .nordicom.gu.s
e/sites/default/files/kapitel-pdf/157_175-196.pdf) 
Shils, Edward, and Michael Young. "The meaning of the coronation." The Sociological
Review  1.2 : 63–81.Further  reading
Strong, Sir Roy  . Coronation: A History of Kingship and the British Monarchy  (https://b
ooks.google.com/books?id=9OwW AQAAIAAJ) . London: HarperCollins. ISBN  978-0-00-
716054-9 .
Weight, Richard. Patriots: National Identity in Britain 1940–2000   pp
211–56.
Order of Service of the Coronation of Queen Elizabeth II  
Music and musicians at the coronation  
Newsreel of the coronation  (http://www .cbc.ca/archives/categories/society/the-monarchy/ca
nadas-new-queen/coronation-of-queen-elizabeth-ii.html)
Videos of the celebrations  
Canada at the Coronation    (http://www .nfb.ca/film/canada_at_coronation/)
Coronation model aids architects    (https://www .youtube.com/watch?v=f9g6h1Y pZBQ)
Elizabeth is Queen    (https://www .youtube.com/watch?v=M5LL8xM85lA)
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Coronation_of_Elizabeth_II&oldid=1295899905"