21st birthday speech of Princess Elizabeth
On 21 April 1947, Princess Elizabeth , the heir presumptive  to the British throne, gave a speech that was
broadcast to the British Commonwealth  on her 21st birthday . Elizabeth was accompanying her parents,
King Geor ge VI and Queen Elizabeth , on a tour of southern Africa. It was her first overseas tour .
The speech was broadcast to the "youth of the Empire" and was broadcast on the BBC Home Service  in
the United Kingdom at 6:55 pm on 21 April 1947, her 21st birthday . Her birthday had been declared a
national holiday in South Africa . A description of her birthday celebrations in Cape Town preceded the
speech on the Home Service. Elizabeth had spent the morning of her birthday at Government House  in
Cape Town after an earlier plan to ascen d Table Mountain  by cable car was abandoned due to inclement
weather . Elizabeth then reviewed 7,000 troops and associated South African military personnel at a
parade at Youngsfield Military Base in Ottery , Cape Town, that was attended by the South African
cabinet . She then attended a rally of South African youth before returning to Govern ment House to
broadcast the speech. Elizabeth then attended a firework display in her honour before attending a ball at
Government House where she was presented with a diamond necklace by the prime minister of South
Africa , Jan Smuts .
Princess Elizabeth's 21st Birthday Speech
 The full text of the speech at Wikisource
Problems playing this file? See media help.
The speech was written by Dermot Morrah , a journalist for The Times, who was accompanying the tour
as his newspaper's correspondent. Morrah was asked to write the speech by King Geor ge. The initial
draft of the speech was almost thrown away by a steward on the Royal Train who was clearing up wine
bottles but subsequently found. Morrah subsequently received a letter from Alan Lascelles , the private
secretary to the sovereign , who thanked him for the speech and said that the moving passages in the
speech had made Elizabeth cry. Morrah never publicly spoke of his authorship of the speech. Lascelles
told Morrah that "Dusty old cynic that I am, it moved me greatly" and that to Lascelles it was reminiscent
of Queen Elizabeth I's speech at Tilbury  and Queen Victoria 's quotation in which she promised "I will be
good". Lascelles told Elizabeth that he was glad the speech had made her cry because  "if it makes you
cry now it will make 200 million other people cry when they hear you". The speech was made lighter
in tone by the King and Queen and Elizabeth alongside Frank Gillard, who was coordinating the BBC's
coverage of the tour .Backgr ound
Content
0:000:00
/ 0:00/ 0:00
The speech was pre-recorded on 13 April while Elizabeth was at the Victoria Falls Hotel in Southern
Rhodesia , on the present day border of Zimbab we and Zambia. Elizabeth was recorded reading the
speech for a newsreel in the garden of the hotel before recording the speech  for the later BBC radio
broadcast.
In the speech Elizabeth said that she welcomed "the opportunity to speak to all the peoples of the British
Commonwealth and Empire, wherever they live, whatever race they come from , and whatever language
they speak" and said that the day bought "serious thoughts-thoughts of life looming ahead with all its
challenges and with all its opportunity" but that it was "a great help to know that there are multitudes of
friends all round the world who are thinking of me and who wish me well". Elizabeth said that she was
"6,000 miles from the country where I was born, but I am certainly not 6,000 miles from home" as she
and her family had been "made to feel that we are just as much at home here as if we had lived among
them all our lives". She asked to speak as the "representative" of the youth of the Commonwealth who
had grown up during the Second World War and said it was "surely a great joy to us all to think that we
shall be able to take some of the burden off the shoulders of our elders who have fought and worked and
suffered to protect our childhood". Elizabeth then quoted the poet Rupert Brooke  ("Now God be
thanked Who has matched us with His hour") and William Pitt the Younger  ("England had saved herself
by her exertions and would save Europe by her example") before saying that "If we all go forward
together with an unwavering faith, a high courage, and a quiet heart, we shall be able to make of this
ancient Commonwealth which we all love so dearly , an even grander thing-more free, more prosperous,
more happy , and a more powerful influence for good in the world-than it has been in the greatest days of
our forefathers. To accomplish that we must give nothing less than the whole of ourselves". She said
that "the British Empire has saved the world first, and has now to save itself after the battle is won". She
then spoke of the motto "Ich dien" ("I Serve") saying that "These words were an inspiration to many
bygone heirs to the throne when they made their knightly dedication as they came to manhood. I cannot
do quite as they did, but through the inventions of science I can do what was not possible for any of
them" and that she could "make my solemn act of dedication with a whole Empire listening. I should like
to make that dedication now. It is very simple. I declare before you all that my whole life, whether it be
long or short, shall be devoted to your service and to the service of our great imperial family to which we
all belong, but I shall not have strength to carry out this resolution alone unless you join in it with me, as I
now invite you to do".
The cold open of 48:1 from the fourth season  of The Crown  featuring a young Princess
Elizabeth ( Claire Foy ) reciting the now-famous birthday speech. The speech was briefly
mentioned in the series finale Sleep, Dearie Sleep .
Elizabeth's biographer , Matthew Dennis on, believed that the speech was a "poetic precursor" to the oath
she subsequently delivered at her coronation. Lascelles wrote that he was "a bit exhilarated by the
tremendous success" of the speech. Elizabeth's grandmother Queen Mary  wrote in her diary that she
wept upon hearing the speech.In popular  cultur e
Reception
1. "Broadcasting"  (https://link.gale.com/apps/doc/CS102057109/TTDA?u=wes_ttda&sid=book
mark-TTDA&xid=f99a0016) . The T imes . No. 50740. 21 April 1947. p. 6.
2. Utley , Charles (June 2017), "My grandfather wrote the Princess's speech"  (https://www .theol
die.co.uk/article/my-grandfather-wrote-the-princesss-speech) , The Oldie , archived  (https://w
eb.archive.org/web/20220531074419/https://www .theoldie.co.uk/article/my-grandfather-wrot
e-the-princesss-speech)  from the original on 31 May 2022 , retrieved 8 September  2022
3. Dennison, Matthew (2021). The Queen . Head of Zeus. ISBN  978-1-78854-591-4 .
OCLC  1246536920  (https://search.worldcat.org/oclc/1246536920) .
4. Fisher , Connie (20 April 1947), "A speech by the Queen on her 21st birthday"  (https://www .r
oyal.uk/21st-birthday-speech-21-april-1947) , The Royal Family , Royal Household, archived
(https://web.archive.org/web/20170103191402/https://www .royal.uk/21st-birthday-speech-21
-april-1947)  from the original on 3 January 2017 , retrieved 18 April 2016
Royal.uk - A speech by the Queen on her 21st Birthday , 1947  (https://www .royal.uk/21st-birt
hday-speech-21-april-1947)
Clip of Elizabeth reading the speech from Heir to the Throne  (https://www .nfsa.gov .au/collect
ion/curated/heir-throne-princess-elizabeths-speech-her-21st-birthday)
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?
title=21st_birthday_speech_of_Princess_Elizabeth&oldid=1271784375"Refer ences
External links

————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————

Royal Christmas message
The King's Christmas message  (or The Queen's Christmas message  in a queen's reign), formally as
His Majesty's Most Gracious Speech , and informally as the Royal Christmas message ) is a
broadcast made by the sovereign of the United Kingdom  and the other Commonwealth realms  to the
Commonwealth of Nations  each year at Christmas . The tradition began in 1932 with a radio broadcast by
King Geor ge V via the British Broadcasting Corporation 's Empire Service . The message is broadcast on
television, radio, and the Internet via various providers. It is usually broadcast at 15:00 GMT  on
Christmas Day. Unlike some other speeches, such as the King's Speech  at the State Opening of
Parliament  which is written by the government, the Christmas speech is a personal message written by
the monarch with input from spouses and direct advisors.
1932 Royal Christmas Message
 The full text of the speech at Wikisource
Problems playing this file? See media help.
The idea for a Christmas message from the sovereign to the British Empire  was first proposed by the
founding director -general of the British Broadcasting Corporation  (BBC), John Reith , in 1922 when he
approached King Geor ge V about making a short broadcast on the newly created radio service. The King
declined, however , believing that radio was mainly an entertainment. Reith approached the King again
ten years later, in 1932, as a way to inaugurate the Empire Service  (now the World Service) and the
King finally agreed after being encouraged to do so by Queen Mary and Prime Minister Ramsay
MacDonald . That year, King Geor ge V read the first Royal Christmas message, which was scripted by
Rudyard Kipling ; the King was originally hesitant about using the relatively untested medium of radio ,
but was reassured after a summertime visit to the BBC and agreed to carry out the concept and read the
speech from a temporary studio set up at Sandringham House . The 1934 Christmas broadcast was
introduced from Ilmington  Manor by 65-year -old Walton Handy , a local shepherd, with carols from the
church choir and the bells ringing from the town church, and reached an estim ated 20 million people in
Australia, Canada, India, Kenya, South Africa and the United Kingdom.
While his brother , King Edward VIII, abdicated  just before his first Christmas as king, King Geor ge VI
continued his father's Christmas broadcasts; it was in his 1939 reading delivered in the opening stages of
the Second World War that he uttered the famous lines: "I said to the man who stood at the Gate of the
Year, 'Give me a light that I may tread safely into the unknown.' And he replied, 'Go out into the darkness,
and put your hand into the Hand of God. That shall be to you better than light, and safer than a known
way.'"History
0:000:00
/ 0:00/ 0:00
George V giving the 1934 Royal
Christmas message
Elizabeth II giving the first televised
Christmas message, broadcast in 1957For many years, the King's speech came at the end of an hour-
long broadcast of greeting from various parts of the British
Empire and Commonwealth which typically included
interviews with ordinary people of many occupations such as
an innkeeper in an English village, a miner in South Africa ,
and a lifeguard in Australia with the King's speech serving as
a bond tying the Commonwealth together .
King Geor ge VI's daughter and successor , Queen Elizabeth II,
delivered her first Christmas message from her study at
Sandringham House, at 3:07 PM on 25 December 1952,
approximately ten months after her father's death. Five years
later, the message was broadcast on television for the first
time. It has been an annual television broadc ast every year
since, with the exception of 1959 and 1963 when the Queen
was heavily pregnant; and 1969: that year, no message was
given because a special documentary film, Royal Family , had
been produced during the summer in connection with the
investiture of the Prince of Wales. It was therefore decided not to do a broadcast at Christmas, but the
Queen issued a written message instead.
Until 1996, the Christmas broadcast was always produced by the BBC; the monopoly was ended when it
was announced that, from 1997, the message would be produced and broadcast alternately by the BBC
and its main rival, Independent Television News  (ITN), with a biennial rotation. It was reported by
The Daily Telegraph  that this decision was made after the BBC decided to screen an interview with
Diana, Princess of Wales, on its current affairs programme Panorama . This was denied by
Buckingham Palace which said the new arrangements "reflect the composition of the television and radio
industries today". Beginning in 201 1, Sky News  was added to the rotation.
Sky News recorded the Queen's Christmas message for Christmas 2012, the Queen's Diamond Jubilee
year, and for the first (and only) time it was recorded in 3D. Buckingham Palace  was reported to have
stated: "We wanted to do something a bit different and special in this Jubilee year, so doing it for the first
time in 3D seemed a good thing, technology wise, to do."
Under the reign of Queen Elizabeth II, the themes and direction of the speeches were decided by the
Queen and the text was largely written by the Queen herself, sometimes with assistance from her husband
Prince Philip  and her staff. In the later years of her reign, the speeches became more personal and
religious in tone. Her son and successor , King Charles III, reportedly writes the script of his Christmas
messages himself without input from staf f.
Traditionally , the message begins with the British national anthem God Save the King  (or Queen ), (except
for 1968, 1986–2000, 2002, and 2007 in which it ended the message).
A British family watching the Queen's
Christmas message during the COVID-19
pandemic in 2020.The message typically combines a chronicle of that year's
major events, with specific focus on the Commonwealth of
Nations, and with the sovereign's own personal milestones
and feelings on Christmas. It is one of the few instances when
the sovereign speaks publicly without advice from any
ministers of the Crown  in any of the monarch's realms .
Planning for each year's address begins months earlier , when
the monarch establishes a theme and appropriate archival
footage is collected and assembled; the actual speech is
recorded a few days prior to Christmas.
Timing:
On the internet, as in the United Kingdom, broadcast of the King's Christmas message is
embargoed until 15:00 GMT  on 25 December .
New Zealand is the first country in the Commonwealth to broadcast the message over the
airwaves, at 18:06 local time (5:06 am GMT) by Radio New Zealand  on RNZ National , then
again at 18:50 by Television New Zealand  on TVNZ1 .
In Australia, the message is broadcast by the Australian Broadcasting Corporation  at 15:20
local time (5:20 am to 8:20 am GMT , depending on the time zone ).
In Canada, the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation  broadcasts the message generally at
noon local time on CBC Television  (3:30 pm to 8 pm GMT  depending on the time zone ), and
at 11:50 am local time on CBC Radio One  and CBC Music . Some private stations such as
CTV also carry the speech.
Outside of the Commonwealth, C-SP AN in the United States airs the King's message at
times that vary depending on the network's schedule. No American radio station airs the
broadcast, although some areas bordering Canada can receive it via the CBC.Broadcast
Year NotesProduced
by
1932Written by Rudyard Kipling, the speech touched on the advance of technology that
permitted the King to deliver an intimate message to all parts of the world, as well as
mentioning the need for work towards peace and counselling listeners to aim for
"prosperity without self-seeking."
BBC1933In his second Christmas address, George V expressed his gratitude to his subjects for
their Christmas greetings and reassured listeners that "the past year has shown much
progress towards world recovery [from the Great Depression] and the setting in order of
our respective communities" and spoke of his "hope and confidence" for the future. He
also spoke of the improvements in worldwide communications brought by technology and
the benefits that brings in dealing with problems in a timely fashion.
1934King George V spoke of the British Empire as being "bound to me and to one another by
a spirit of one great family" and of how he and Queen Mary were moved by the way "this
spirit was manifested" at the marriage that year of his son, the Duke of Kent and Princess
Marina. He added, in reference to the ongoing economic and international political crises
of the decade, that he wished this spirit within the Empire would deepen and widen in
response to a restless world adding that "The clouds are lifting, but we have still our own
anxieties to meet. I am convinced that if we meet them in the spirit of one family we shall
overcome them." He also referred to the importance of the emerging Dominions within
the Empire asserting that "Through them the family has become a commonwealth of free
nations, and they have carried into their homes the memories and traditions of the Mother
Country." He also addressed the growing demands for Indian independence by assuring
the people of British India "of my constant care, and I desire that they will all fully realise
and value their own place in the unity of the one family."
1935The speech mentioned the King's 25th anniversary of his accession to the throne and his
place as a personal link between his peoples, as well as the marriage of his son, Prince
Henry, Duke of Gloucester, and the death of his sister, Princess Victoria. He also referred
to his desire for peace and goodwill among all nations saying this will also bring a solution
to the Great Depression economic troubles of the period. The King offered his sympathy
to all those in the Empire suffering personal distress and also called for hope and cheer
united by the bonds of service which would give people the resoluteness needed to
overcome their difficulties.
No message as he abdicated  prior to what would have been his first Christmas on the throne.Messages
George V
Edward VIII
Year NotesProduced
by
1936No message was delivered, as King Edward VIII had abdicated the throne two weeks
prior. None
1937In his first broadcast as king, the King recalled his father's broadcasts to the Empire and
the reverence listeners had for him. George VI said he could not aspire to replace his
father's broadcasts but that nevertheless, as this was his first Christmas as King, he
thanked the Empire for its support and loyalty during his first year on the throne. He
expressed his pledge to be worthy of his subjects' support. Looking back on 1937, he
noted the "shadows of enmity and of fear" hanging over parts of the world but turned to
the message of Christmas, of peace and good will, and expressed hope that that spirit
would prevail and continue to be the keystone of people's lives.BBC
1938No message was delivered.None
1939Delivering his message on the first Christmas of the Second World War the King spoke
live from Sandringham House to offer a message of reassurance. He spoke of Christmas
as a festival of peace and lamented that "it is the tragedy of this time that there are
powerful countries whose whole direction and policy are based on aggression and the
suppression of all that we hold dear for mankind." He continued, saying: "It is this that has
stirred our peoples and given them a unity unknown in any previous war. We feel in our
hearts that we are fighting against wickedness, and this conviction will give us strength
from day to day to persevere until victory is assured." He spoke of his pride in the Royal
Navy's courage and devotion in its battles in the first months of the war as well as the
courage of the merchant marine. He also expressed thanks to the British Expeditionary
Force and other armies of the Empire saying that "Their task is hard. They are waiting,
and waiting is a trial of nerve and discipline. But I know that when the moment comes for
action they will prove themselves worthy of the highest traditions of their great Service."
He referred to the nations and colonies of the Empire as a "Family of Nations which is
prepared to sacrifice everything that freedom of spirit may be saved to the world" and
referred to the assistance Britain has received from the rest of the Empire. George VI
referred to "the cause of Christian civilisation" as what unites the Empire and its Allies,
adding that "On no other basis can a true civilisation be built." He concluded with words of
encouragement from the poem God Knows by Minnie Louise Haskins: 'I said to the man
who stood at the Gate of the Year, "Give me a light that I may tread safely into the
unknown." And he replied, "Go out into the darkness, and put your hand into the Hand of
God. That shall be to you better than light, and safer than a known way."'BBCGeorge VI
1930s
Year NotesProduced
by
1940King George spoke of separation and unity: the sadness brought by separation during
wartime for members of the Armed Forces and their families and for British families
whose children were evacuated overseas to Canada, Australia, New Zealand, South
Africa, and the United States and the unity brought by facing common perils and suffering
at home and at the front by civilians and military alike and of the fellowship springing up
among the British people in the face of adversity and of his hopes that this newfound
spirit of unity a fellowship will continue into peacetime and among all the nations of the
world.BBC
1941The King focused on our "one great family," stating: "[it is] in serving each other and in
sacrificing for our common good that we are finding our true life." He spoke of "the men
who in every part of the world are serving the Empire and its cause with such valour and
devotion by sea, land and in the air" as well as the women "who at the call of duty have
left their homes to join the services, or to work in factory, hospital or field" and also
remembered the suffering of the wounded, bereaved and prisoners of war and his
confidence that the service and sacrifice of the British people for the sake of the common
good will win the war and a lasting peace and called on the people to go into the coming
year with courage, strength and good heart to overcome the perils that lie
ahead.
1942The King spoke of the confidence given him by recent Allied military victories and of the
contributions by the United States and the Soviet Union in the war against Nazi Germany
as well as by Americans and Australians in the Pacific Theatre against Japan. He also
spoke to the mobilization of the Indian people against the threat of Japanese invasion and
of other outposts of the British Empire, speaking directly to British forces serving there
referring to the "Commonwealth of Nations as a "family circle, whose ties, precious in
peaceful years, have been knit even closer by danger." He also spoke to those who have
lost loved ones or been parted from them and of his and the Queen's feelings of sorrow,
comfort, and also pride. He referred as well to his visits across the country witnessing the
increase in agricultural production for the war effort and his thankfulness to and
admiration of those who work the land. He also spoke of the foreign government leaders
and officials who have sought refuge in Britain and called on them to be welcomed in the
spirit of brotherhood.
1943On behalf of himself and the Queen, King George sent greetings and good wishes to
"each one of you all the world over", to those serving in the military around the world,
those wounded lying in hospital, as well as civilians at work or at home and remarked that
the thoughts of all are in "distant places" and their hearts are with the ones they love. The
King also spoke of his thanks for the victories of the past year and his thankfulness for the
contribution of the United States, the Soviet Union and China and of the unity of the
"United Nations" (the Allies) as well as his thoughts for France and occupied lands. He
also spoke of the spirit of the people saying "We know that much hard working, and hard
fighting – perhaps harder working and harder fighting than ever before – are necessary
for victory. We shall not rest from our task until it is nobly ended."
1944The King spoke of hope in his message saying that "the lamps which the Germans had
put out all over Europe were being rekindled and were beginning to shine through the fog
of war." He added that "at this Christmas time we think proudly and gratefully of our
fighting men wherever they may be. May God bless and protect them and bring them
victory" adding as well his good wishes to the sick and wounded in hospital and the
medical staff caring for them, and of prisoners of war and the relatives at home waiting for
them to return. He also spoke of the hard work and sacrifice of people throughout the
Empire who have helped bring victory nearer and of the goal of creating after the war "a
world of free men, untouched by tyranny."
1945He said that although much of great price had been given up to attain victory, that which
had been saved was beyond value and that the vision of world peace he had spoken of in
previous broadcasts during the war had become a reality.
1946The King reviewed the privations of the war years, the difficulties of postwar adjustment,
and added words of encouragement to his subjects, and advised patience saying -"We1940s
cannot expect the world, so grievously wounded, to recover quickly, but its convalescence
can certainly be hastened by our continued endurance and goodwill" adding that though
the previous year due to shortages and the burdens of post-war reconstruction had not
been easy "Better days lie ahead and our task is to mobilise the Christmas spirit and
apply its power of healing to our daily life."
1947The King stated that "the unity and steadfastness of the British Commonwealth and
Empire saved the liberties of the world" and called on listeners to remember that and not
to doubt their "power and will to win through" in the face of post-war challenges and
adversity.
1948King George VI delivered his Christmas message from Buckingham Palace for the first
time as he was unable to travel outside London, to his Sandringham retreat, due to ill
health. He recalled that the year had seen the silver anniversary of his marriage to his
consort as well as the birth of his grandson, Prince Charles. He also spoke of his illness
and his regret at having to cancel a planned tour of Australia and New Zealand as a
result. He referred to the "evolution" of the British Commonwealth and his pride at its
"widening the bounds of freedom wherever our people live."
1949The King reassured people of his recovery from illness and expressed his gratitude to the
United States of America for its sympathy and help in Britain's effort towards recovery; at
the time, Britain was the largest beneficiary of the Marshall Plan.
Year NotesProduced
by
1950With the deepening Cold War, the Korean War, Malayan Emergency as well as the risk
posed by thermonuclear weapons, the King spoke of "the grim shadow of war" hanging
over the world. He took as the theme of his message John Bunyan's Pilgrim's Progress,
its story of going forward, only to fall back while keeping "our eyes fixed on the far-off,
delectable mountains of peace and good will" as took from the book the motto "Whatever
comes or does not come. I'll not be afraid" and the need for each individual to bear his
burden, even if it seems insurmountable. The King also expressed his wish for peace
saying "if our world is to survive in any sense that makes survival worthwhile, it must
learn to love and not to hate, and to create and not destroy" warning that mankind must
choose between these two paths.BBC
1951George VI's final Christmas message was the only broadcast that he pre-recorded, as he
had recently undergone lung surgery. He spoke of his recovery and the goodwill
messages he had received: "From my peoples in these islands and in the British
Commonwealth and Empire – as well as from many other countries – this support and
sympathy has reached me and I thank you now from my heart..."1950s
Year NotesProduced
by
1952In her first Christmas message, from the same desk and chair used by her father and
grandfather before him, the Queen spoke of carrying on the tradition of Christmas
broadcasts passed on to her by George V and George VI and said she would strive to
carry on their work to unite the peoples of the Empire and maintain their ideals and
thanked her people for their loyalty and affection in the first months of her reign. She also
referred to the British Commonwealth and Empire as an "immense union of nations" that
was like a family and which "can be a great power for good – a force which I believe can
be of immeasurable benefit to all humanity... At my Coronation next June, I shall dedicate
myself anew to your service".BBC
1953This message was broadcast from Auckland, New Zealand, during the Queen and her
husband's six-month royal tour of the Commonwealth and spoke of her trip so far and
what she hoped to learn and accomplish from the tour. The Queen referred to the Crown
as a "personal and loving bond" between herself and her people and spoke of feeling at
home in Auckland despite its distance from London. She spoke of the Commonwealth as
a "fellowship" which bears no resemblance to the empires of the past and in which Britain
is but an equal partner. She finished the broadcast with a note of sympathy to those
affected by the Tangiwai disaster the night before.
1954The Queen broadcast this message from Sandringham House at the end of a year in
which she and her husband, Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh, had travelled around the
world.
1955Broadcast live from her study at Sandringham House, the Queen's theme was the
opportunities arising from membership of the Commonwealth of Nations. With the launch
of ITV in the UK, the sound-only television broadcast was simulcast on both ITV and the
BBC Television Service from this year on.
1956Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh spoke from HMY Britannia during a voyage around the
Commonwealth before the Queen made her speech live from Sandringham House in
which she referred to the Duke's message (https://timesmachine.nytimes.com/timesmachi
ne/1956/12/26/issue.html) as the one that gave her and her children the greatest joy
listening to and wished him a good journey before expressing her sadness at being
separated from him. She also expressed her sympathies to those who, unlike her, do not
enjoy a united family or cannot be at home for Christmas or who are alone or have been
driven from home and asked listeners to think especially of those who have been driven
from their homelands by war or violence, refugees, asking that they be given true refuge
and, in a reference to the story of Christ's birth, be given room at the inn. As in previous
messages, she compared the Commonwealth to a family in which, despite its differences,
"for the sake of ultimate harmony, the healing power of tolerance, comradeship and love
must be allowed to play its part." The broadcast was criticised for the Queen's
continued refusal to have it televised and for having "too many ponderous platitudes
written into it by her officials" and for presenting "a false picture of the Commonwealth as
one big happy British family – all Anglo-Saxons under the skin."
1957This year's message, read from the Long Library at Sandringham House, was the first to
be televised and was also the 25th anniversary of the first Christmas broadcast on radio.
The Queen noted the milestone and the advance of technology that allowed her message
to be viewed in her subjects' homes. She added that while change might be bewildering,
it is important to hold on to ageless ideals and values such as the importance of religion,
morality, honesty and self-restraint and spoke of the need for courage to stand up for
what is right, true and honest. During this season freak radio conditions caused by
sunspots resulted in American police radio transmissions interfering with British television
broadcasts. One occasion of interference occurred during the Queen's speech, causing
listeners to hear an American police officer say, "Joe, I'm gonna grab a quick coffee."Elizabeth II
1950s
1958The reading, coming from the Long Library at Sandringham House, focused on the
importance of spiritual and family values and some of the journeys soon to be made
around the Commonwealth by the Queen and members of the Royal Family. The Queen
also responded to requests that her children be shown in the broadcast by saying that
after a great deal of thought she and her husband decided against it as they want their
children to grow up as naturally as possible. This was the final Christmas message to be
delivered live.
1959The Queen pre-recorded her Christmas message for the first time. The message was
recorded in Buckingham Palace a week prior to broadcast and lasted about one minute. It
was not broadcast on television this year (the Queen was heavily pregnant with Prince
Andrew at the time).  It conveyed the Queen's best wishes and her gratitude for the
warm wishes she had received. Being pre-recorded allowed the message to be shipped
abroad in advance and to be broadcast in Australia and New Zealand on Christmas Day
for the first time as time differences and the International Date Line meant that many
previous live broadcasts were actually heard on Boxing Day in Australia and New
Zealand. As a result of the success of the recording, all subsequent Christmas messages
have also been pre-recorded.
Year NotesProduced
by
1960The Queen spoke from Buckingham Palace and described an eventful year in which she
gave birth to Prince Andrew; her sister, Princess Margaret, married Anthony Armstrong-
Jones; and Nigeria gained its independence while remaining part of the Commonwealth.
The disasters to which The Queen alluded to included that year's earthquake in Morocco;
the deaths of protesters in Sharpeville, South Africa; and an explosion in Six Bells Colliery
near Aberbeeg, Monmouthshire.
BBC1961The Queen reflected on her six-week tour of India, Pakistan, Nepal, and Iran, as well as
her visit to Vatican City.
1962The speech from Buckingham Palace referred to recent successes in space, including the
launch of Telstar, which made it possible to broadcast television, images, and news
around the world almost instantly.
1963The Queen reverted to a message delivered by radio, as she was pregnant with her
fourth child, Prince Edward. She spoke of the importance of the campaign to free the
world from hunger and the Commonwealth's response and spoke of the hope and
promise of the future and the need for humanity to be ambitious for the achievement of
what is good and honourable.
1964Elizabeth addressed the important role of the Commonwealth in a year in which anti-
apartheid leader Nelson Mandela was jailed in apartheid South Africa and Indian Prime
Minister Jawaharlal Nehru died.
1965The address from Buckingham Palace took as its theme the family, from the individual
unit to the family of man.
1966The Queen spoke about the increasingly prominent and important role played by women
in society.
1967Elizabeth spoke of Canada's centenary of its confederation and her five week tour of the
country to mark the event and also mentioned her knighting of Sir Francis Chichester.
The message, filmed at Buckingham Palace, was the first to be shown in colour.
1968This year's Christmas message, which came from Buckingham Palace and had a theme
of brotherhood, included mention of civil rights leader Martin Luther King Jr.'s
assassination.
1969No Christmas address was given by the Queen, as Elizabeth felt that, between the
investiture of her son, Prince Charles, as Prince of Wales and the release of the
documentary Royal Family, she had had enough coverage on television; concern
expressed by the public prompted the Queen to issue a statement that assured a return
to tradition in 1970. The sentiment was perhaps undermined when, in place of the
televised address, BBC1 & BBC2 simultaneously repeated The Royal Family film on
Christmas Day. The Queen's written message acknowledged the end of the 1960s and
the decade's significance for being the time when men first walked on the Moon. She also
stated that she was looking forward to her visit the following year to Australia, New
Zealand, Fiji, Tonga and northern Canada. She also expressed her concern that "the
lonely, the sick and the elderly" all feel the warmth and companionship of Christmas.None1960s
Year NotesProduced
by
1970Once again televised, the speech recounted some of the trips made by the Queen during
the year; it included film shot in Australia, New Zealand and Canada.
BBC1971Focusing on the theme of families, the television version showed Prince Andrew and
Prince Edward looking at a family photograph album.
1972The production included scenes from the celebration of the Queen's 25 years of marriage
to The Duke of Edinburgh and Elizabeth mentioned the violence in Northern Ireland, as
well as the preparations for Britain to join the European Economic Community.
1973Interspersed with footage of the Queen giving her oration was film shot during the
wedding of the Queen's daughter, Princess Anne, to Captain Mark Phillips.
1974In a more sombre tone, the Christmas message alluded to problems such as the
continuing violence in Northern Ireland and the Middle East, that year's famine in
Bangladesh, and the floods in Brisbane, Australia.
1975Broadcast from the gardens of Buckingham Palace, it was the first time the message had
been recorded outdoors, and acknowledged a year of record inflation and unemployment
in the UK and worldwide.
1976To mark the United States Bicentennial, the Queen and Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh
undertook a state visit to the United States of America; that visit, and the theme of
reconciliation after disagreements, formed the focus of the message.
1977The Queen recalled the year's celebrations for her Silver Jubilee, and expressed hope for
reconciliation in Northern Ireland, where she had visited in August for the first time in 11
years.
1978The future was the subject selected by the Queen, with the broadcast including footage of
her with her new grandson, Peter Phillips, and Princess Anne, as well as recordings of
earlier broadcasts going back to George V.
19791979 was the Year of the Child, and the Christmas message addressed the theme of
children and young people. In this broadcast, Ceefax was used for the first time providing
subtitles for the hard of hearing.1970s
Year NotesProduced
by
1980The message, which attracted a record 28 million viewers in the United Kingdom,
reflected on celebrations for the 80th birthday of Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother, and
addressed the theme of service in its many forms. There were also reflections from the
independence of Zimbabwe and the dramatic rescue operation of the Iranian Embassy
Siege.
BBC1981The speech was broadcast from the terrace behind Buckingham Palace and marked the
International Year of Disabled Persons.
1982Marking the 50th anniversary of the first Christmas message, the Queen delivered it at
the library of Windsor Castle for the first time. The theme was "the sea", in a year in which
British troops fought in the Falklands War in the South Atlantic Ocean. The birth and
christening of the Queen's third grandchild Prince William.
1983The Christmas message discussed new possibilities for co-operation within the
Commonwealth of Nations permitted by modern technologies. The Queen mentioned a
visit to Bangladesh and India that year, in which she met Indian Prime Minister Indira
Gandhi, invested Mother Teresa into the Order of Merit, and attended the Commonwealth
Heads of Government Meeting in New Delhi.
1984The message was the lessons which adults could learn from children, with film featuring
the christening of the Queen's fourth grandchild, Prince Harry.
1985The Queen spoke of the earthquake that struck Mexico City, the volcanic eruption in
Colombia, famine in Africa, and the Air India crash off the coast of Ireland, though the
message focused on the good news stories of the year, as the Queen praised remarkable
public achievements to footage of investitures and the presentation of awards.
1986David Attenborough, as he would until 1991, produced the Christmas message
broadcast, which in 1986 was filmed in the Royal Mews at Buckingham Palace and
stressed society's responsibility towards children.
1987The Queen mentioned the Remembrance Day bombing in Enniskillen, Northern Ireland,
and stressed the importance of tolerance and forgiveness.
1988Along with added references to the Clapham Junction rail crash, the Lockerbie disaster,
and the Armenian earthquake that all occurred after the main broadcast was recorded,
the Queen reflected on three important anniversaries: the 400th of the Spanish Armada,
the 300th of the arrival in Britain of the future William III and Mary II, and the 200th of the
founding of Australia.
1989The Queen read her Christmas speech from the Royal Albert Hall, recorded at a special
gala occasion for Save the Children, meaning that, for the first time, an audience heard
the speech prior to its international airing. The Queen reflected on the sense of wonder as
a child, as well as Jesus Christ's Parable of The Good Samaritan, and how that could
spur on meaningful environmental and cultural change. She, and the Princess Royal also
spoke to children at the end of the broadcast. There were also reflections from the
Hillsborough disaster and the fall of the Berlin Wall.1980s
Year NotesProduced
by
1990The Queen paid tribute to the role of the armed services in the context of imminent war in
the Persian Gulf.
BBC1991The message reflected on the enormous changes taking place across Eastern Europe
and Russia, which included the dissolution of the Soviet Union, and the importance of
democratic traditions.
1992The Christmas speech came one month after a fire destroyed part of Windsor Castle; the
Queen addressed the importance of personal fortitude, as embodied by members of the
armed services undertaking difficult peacekeeping duties, and Leonard Cheshire, who
died that year. The speech was leaked to The Sun prior to broadcast. This was the 60th
anniversary of the speech and the 40th year for the Queen.
1993The Queen praised the achievements of volunteers working for peace and the relief of
others.
1994Reflecting on past and present peace efforts, Elizabeth remarked on her attendance at
the ceremonies marking the 50th anniversary of the Normandy Landings and her state
visit to Russia.
1995Beginning with a reminder of the 50th anniversary of VE-Day and VJ-Day, the Queen
stated that remembrance was an important part of life, and paid tribute to those who had
served and those who had not returned. She then turned to present-day conflicts, such as
the Bosnian War, in which Commonwealth forces were serving, to the full year of peace in
Northern Ireland, and referred to her Buckingham Palace invitation to voluntary workers
working throughout the world. The Queen mentioned the work of Sister Ethel, a nun
helping children in the townships of South Africa, and ended by paying tribute to
peacemakers throughout the world.
1996The Queen spoke of her trips to Poland, the Czech Republic, and Thailand, as well as the
visit to the UK by South African President Nelson Mandela, with an overall theme of hope
for the future.
1997The first Christmas message produced by Independent Television News, as well as the
first to be published on the Internet, and the 40th year of the message on television, it
opened with contrasting pictures of Westminster Abbey, which the Queen reminded
viewers had that year been the scene of the funeral of Diana, Princess of Wales, as well
as the celebration of Elizabeth's golden wedding anniversary, speaking of the joy of her
married life. The Queen then reminded viewers of her trips to Canada, India, and
Pakistan, and of the return of Hong Kong to China, before paying tribute to that year's
Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting. In conclusion, the Queen welcomed the
imminent devolution of power to Scotland and Wales, and spoke of the benefits of being a
United Kingdom.ITN
1998The message focused on lessons that could be learnt by different generations from each
other, and the broadcast included film of Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother, visiting the
Field of Remembrance at Westminster Abbey, the Queen at Ypres and in Paris, and the
reception for the Prince of Wales' 50th birthday.
1999The Queen expressed her looking forward to the start of a new century and a new
millennium, as well as at the lessons of history. The broadcast, filmed in the White
Drawing Room of Windsor Castle, featured footage of a reception for young achievers at
Holyrood Palace, and a reception for members of the emergency services at Buckingham
Palace.BBC1990s
Year NotesProduced
by
2000The Queen used her Christmas broadcast to reflect on the true start of the new
millennium and the role of faith in communities. The broadcast included film of that year's
visit to Australia.BBC
2001Elizabeth, in this speech which she described as "my 50th Christmas message to you,"
(her 1969 message was in writing and not broadcast) referred to the unusual number of
trials and disasters that year, alluding to the foot-and-mouth disease outbreak and the 11
September attacks; viewers saw the occasion when the American national anthem was
played at the changing of the guard. The Queen then spoke of the importance of faith
when drawing strength in troubled times, and paid tribute to those who work for others in
the community.
ITN
2002In her 50th Christmas broadcast (which also marked the 70th year of the Royal Christmas
Message), the Queen spoke on the themes of joy and sadness, reflecting on her
"personal loss" following the deaths of her sister, Princess Margaret, and mother, Queen
Elizabeth The Queen Mother, that year in February and March respectively, and the
comfort she received from her faith and the tributes of others. Her message was delivered
from the White Drawing Room of Buckingham Palace, with photographs of the Queen
Mother, King George VI and Princess Margaret by her side. She recalled the joyous
celebration of her Golden Jubilee with excerpts being shown along with the sombre Bali
memorial service at St Paul's Cathedral in London. She spoke of reliance on the twin
pillars of the "message of hope" in the Christian gospel and the support of the
public.
2003The opening of this message was recorded at the Household Cavalry barracks in
Windsor. With many members of Commonwealth armed forces on foreign deployments,
the Queen encouraged the audience, which included 10 million in the UK, to think of
those not with their families at Christmas, and paid tribute to the work they had done to
bring peace. She also spoke of the importance of teamwork and of what she had
learned when presenting the new Queen's Golden Jubilee Award for Voluntary Service in
the Community. The Queen praised the achievements of the men's England rugby union
team winning the 2003 Rugby World Cup in Australia. 
BBC
2004Opening with footage of the Queen handing out presents to her own family, and
interlaced with coverage of the Queen, Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh, and Charles,
Prince of Wales attending various multicultural meetings, the Queen and Prince Philip,
Duke of Edinburgh visiting a Sikh gurudwara and Charles, Prince of Wales visiting a
Muslim school in east London, the theme of the message was cultural and religious
diversity and the benefits of tolerance. The message was warmly received by leaders of
Britain's Muslim and Sikh communities. In a break from tradition, the Queen also sent a
separate radio Christmas message to UK troops, which was broadcast by the British
Forces Broadcasting Service.
2005The Queen reflected on such tragedies as the Indian Ocean tsunami, Hurricane Katrina,
the earthquake in Kashmir, and the bombings in London; she praised as "quite
remarkable" the humanitarian responses from people of all faiths.
ITN
2006The speech, available for the first time for download as a podcast, was about the
relationship between the generations and how young and old could come together to
strengthen their communities, with strong references to the inclusion of Muslims and
other faiths into mainstream society.
2007The 2007 message began with the introductory remarks from the 1957 Christmas
message shown on a television and the Queen standing beside it. The theme centred on
the family, including Jesus' birth into a family under unfavourable circumstances, and the
Queen spoke about the common duty to care for the vulnerable in society. Footage of the
Royal Marines in the war in Afghanistan, as well as a military memorial, were shown,
accompanied by commentary about the work of troops in Iraq and Afghanistan. The
message ended with a black and white clip of "God Save the Queen" from the original
1957 broadcast and an image of the British royal standard.BBC2000s
2008The Queen acknowledged that concerns about the Great Recession as well as violence
around the world have made that year's Christmas "a more sombre occasion for many"
and called on people to show courage and not accept defeat and instead struggle for a
better future. She also reflected on the 60th birthday of the Prince of Wales and his
charitable works and paid tribute to those who lead charitable lives in the service of
others. This was the first message broadcast in high-definition.
2009The Queen reflected on the role of Commonwealth armed forces serving in
Afghanistan. ITN
Year NotesProduced
by
2010The Queen focused on the importance of the King James Bible (400 years old in 2011) as
a unifying force and of sport in building communities and creating harmony. The
Christmas message included footage of Prince William and Prince Harry playing football
with orphans in Lesotho. Rather than being recorded at Buckingham Palace as is
normally the case, for the first time the Christmas message was filmed in Hampton Court
Palace.ITN
2011Unity and hope in the face of adversity and the importance of family were the themes of
this year's broadcast with royal tours, the Wedding of Prince William and Catherine
Middleton, the wedding of Zara Phillips and Mike Tindall and the differences between the
two, and the Commonwealth also being touched upon in those two contexts, respectively.
The message was recorded prior to the hospitalisation of Prince Philip, Duke of
Edinburgh for emergency heart surgery. This was the first Christmas message produced
by Sky News.Sky
2012Broadcast for the first time in 3D. This message was the 60th that the Queen
delivered to the nation and the Commonwealth, in commemoration of her Diamond
Jubilee, as well as of the 80th anniversary of the Christmas messages and the
achievements of British Olympian and Paralympian athletes at the 2012 Summer
Olympics and the 2012 Summer Paralympics in London respectively.
2013The theme was the importance of reflection in general which segued into specific
reflections on the 60th anniversary of the Queen's coronation and the changes since
then, the role of the Commonwealth with reference to the upcoming 2014 Commonwealth
Games in Glasgow and the recent Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting 2013
in Sri Lanka with a clip of the speech of Charles, Prince of Wales to Commonwealth
leaders being included, and the birth and christening of the Queen's third great-grandchild
Prince George.
BBC
2014The Queen spoke of the centenary of the outbreak of World War I and her visit to a
ceramic poppy memorial at the Tower of London to commemorate those who lost their
lives in the conflict. She recalled the Christmas truce of 1914, the Northern Ireland peace
process and the Scottish independence referendum as she spoke of reconciliation and
forgiveness. She also spoke of "the selflessness of aid workers and medical volunteers
who have gone abroad to help victims of conflict or of diseases like Ebola, often at great
personal risk". There was greater than usual anticipation surrounding the speech
due to rumours that the Queen would be announcing her abdication; however, she made
no such announcement.
2015Addressing a year marked by disasters, terrorist attacks, and a refugee crisis, the Queen
encouraged her audience to find hope in "moments of darkness" and quoted the Gospel
of John in saying 'The light shines in the darkness, and the darkness has not overcome
it.' She also said that Christmas is a "time to remember all that we have to be thankful for"
and give thanks to "the people who bring love and happiness into our own lives". The
Queen also noted that 2015 was the 70th anniversary of the end of World War II and
thanked those who served in the conflict. The Queen also noted the tradition of
decorating the Christmas tree, and how her great-great-grandfather, Prince Albert,
brought the tradition of a Christmas tree with him from Germany to Britain. The Queen
then noted the birth of Princess Charlotte, and that she would be the newest addition of
her family to help her decorate the Christmas tree. The Queen spoke about the Christmas
tree in Trafalgar Square, and acknowledged how Norway gives London the tree as a gift
for helping them in World War II. The message was recorded in Buckingham Palace's
18th Century Room.ITN2010s
2016The theme of the speech was inspiration. The Queen praised the achievements of British
Olympian and Paralympian athletes at the Rio Olympic Games and reflected on the 60th
anniversary of the Duke of Edinburgh Awards and the 40th anniversary of The Prince's
Trust and spoke of the inspiration provided by ordinary people who do small but great
things, saying that: "On our own, we cannot end wars or wipe out injustice, but the
cumulative impact of thousands of small acts of goodness can be bigger than we
imagine."
2017The theme of the speech was the home. The Queen began by acknowledging the 60th
anniversary of her first televised Christmas message, referring to herself in the third
person by saying, "Sixty years ago today, a young woman spoke about the speed of
technological change as she presented the first television broadcast of its kind ... Six
decades on, the presenter has 'evolved' somewhat, as has the technology she
described." She paid tribute to the survivors of the London and Manchester terrorist
attacks and gave her thoughts and prayers to the victims of the Grenfell Tower fire and
those who lost so much in the disaster. She reflected on milestones in her own life,
including her 70th wedding anniversary and the Duke of Edinburgh's decision to step
aside from public duties. She also said she looked forward to welcoming new members
into the Royal Family next year, a reference to the Duke and Duchess of Cambridge
expecting their third child, and to Prince Harry's engagement to his girlfriend, Meghan
Markle. Sky
2018The Queen noted the centenary of the Royal Air Force and the centenary of the Armistice,
and spoke of her father's participation at the Battle of Jutland. She also referenced the
birth of Prince Louis, the weddings of Prince Harry and Meghan Markle and Princess
Eugenie and Jack Brooksbank, as well as the seventieth birthday celebrations for the
Prince of Wales. She said that faith, family, and friendship have been a source of
continuous comfort and reassurance for her. She recalled the 2018 Commonwealth
Heads of Government meeting in London and the 2018 Commonwealth Games and
spoke of the goals of the Commonwealth and its principles of mutual respect and
cooperation. The Queen said that peace and goodwill need to be heeded now as much
as ever, and people should respect each other even when they harbour deeply held
differences.
2019Speaking in Windsor Castle's Green Drawing Room, the Queen introduced her message
by saying how it is "small steps, not the giant leaps" that bring lasting change in the world,
referencing the fiftieth anniversary of the Apollo 11 mission and Neil Armstrong's words
upon setting foot on the Moon. She then spoke of the commemoration that year of the
75th anniversary of the D-Day landings in which former foes set aside their past
differences to commemorate the event together. There were reflections from the 2019 Sri
Lanka Easter bombings. While the Queen did not directly refer to the divisions in 2019
concerning debates around Brexit culminating in the general election, her description of
the year as "quite bumpy" was widely interpreted in the media as being an indirect
reference and her speaking of the importance of reconciliation, saying, "small steps... can
overcome long-held differences and deep-seated divisions to bring harmony and
understanding" was seen as urging the British people to heal divisions among them. The
Queen also noted the birth of her great-grandson, Archie Mountbatten-Windsor, and
spoke of how she has "been struck by how new generations have brought a similar sense
of purpose to issues such as protecting our environment and our climate."BBC
Year NotesProduced
by
2020At the end of a year shaped by the COVID-19 pandemic, the Queen spoke of her great
pride in the "quiet, indomitable" spirit of those who have "risen magnificently" to the
challenges of 2020, adding that "We need life to go on." Speaking of mutual assistance
during the crisis, she said that "Remarkably, a year that has necessarily kept people apart
has, in many ways, brought us closer." To those who have suffered loss, she said "You
are not alone, and let me assure you of my thoughts and prayers." She said what many
people want "for Christmas is a simple hug or a squeeze of the hand" - but "even on the
darkest nights there is hope in the new dawn". The Queen singled out young people for
their part in helping society during the crisis and noted that 2020 was the bicentennial of
the birth of Florence Nightingale when voicing a "debt of gratitude" to nurses and frontline
workers. She also evoked the Parable of the Good Samaritan in praising countless
people who have helped strangers during the pandemic. In addition, she noted the
centenary commemorations of the entombment of the Unknown Warrior, who as a
symbol of "selfless duty and ultimate sacrifice" was, for her, a "source of enduring hope in
difficult and unpredictable times". This was the first Christmas speech available to listen
to on Amazon Alexa devices.BBC
2021In what was to be her final Christmas message, the Queen marked the death of her
consort, Duke of Edinburgh earlier in the year, remarking that "although it's a time of
great happiness and good cheer for many, Christmas can be hard for those who have
lost loved ones. This year, especially, I understand why," also referring to the second year
of the COVID-19 pandemic. She thanked her subjects for the "warmth and affection"
shown in the tributes to the Duke of Edinburgh's life, saying she had drawn "great
comfort" from them. Of Prince Philip, she said: "His sense of service, intellectual curiosity
and capacity to squeeze fun out of any situation were all irrepressible. That mischievous,
enquiring twinkle was as bright at the end as when I first set eyes on him." She delivered
her message while behind a desk in the White Drawing Room at Windsor Castle,
accompanied by a single, framed picture of herself and her late husband. She wore a
sapphire chrysanthemum brooch which she had worn in 1947, during her honeymoon,
and again for her Diamond Wedding celebrations.ITN2020s
Year NotesProduced
by
2022In his first Christmas message, King Charles III paid tribute to his late mother Queen
Elizabeth II—who 65 years prior had appeared on the first Christmas message broadcast
on British television—and thanked those who had expressed their "love and sympathy"
following her death, noting that "Christmas is a particularly poignant time for all of us who
have lost loved ones." He also spoke of his mother's faith and their shared belief in
people and the community work of faith groups in general, mentioning "churches,
synagogues, mosques, temples, and gurdwaras". The King also spoke of the "great
anxiety and hardship" of those struggling to "pay their bills and keep their families fed and
warm" and the generosity of those giving food, donations, or time to support them, paying
tribute to the "selfless dedication" of volunteers, charity workers, teachers, health and
social service workers helping those in financial difficulty. He also praised emergency
services and the armed forces working to "keep us all safe." The message was recorded
on 13 December in St. George's Chapel at Windsor Castle. The
broadcast was initially scheduled to be produced by ITN, but was produced by the BBC
instead after ITN was dismissed. The reason for the change was not disclosed.BBC
2023In his second Christmas message, the King praised volunteers as the "essential
backbone of our society", saying he and the Queen “were delighted” when hundreds of
volunteers and organisations joined them for the coronation, noting that their presence
"emphasised the meaning of coronation itself, above all, a call to us all to serve one
another, to love and care for all". With a living Christmas tree as a backdrop, which was to
be replanted after the broadcast, decorated by natural and sustainable ornaments, the
King said the planet had to be protected "for the sake of our children's children", adding
that "During my lifetime I have been so pleased to see a growing awareness of how we
must protect the Earth and our natural world as the one home which we all share",
referring to this as a spiritual duty in saying "To care for this creation is a responsibility
owned by people of all faiths and of none. We care for the Earth for the sake of our
children's children." Against the backdrop of wars in Ukraine and Gaza, he also
emphasised the importance of "universal" values shared between major religions, at a
time of "increasingly tragic conflict around the world". The speech was recorded on 7
December in the Centre Room at Buckingham Palace with the Victoria Memorial visible
through the window.ITN
2024The King recorded his message in the former hospital chapel of Fitzrovia Chapel, one of
the few times a sovereign has not delivered the Christmas speech at a royal residence
such as Windsor Castle, Buckingham Palace or Sandringham House. In a year in
which both the King and the Princess of Wales received treatment for cancer, the speech
reflected on personal, national and international challenges, and how they can be
overcome through community support. The King praised healthcare workers for
dedicating their lives to helping others, as well as recalling the sacrifice of soldiers during
D-Day, which had its 80th anniversary commemorated in 2024. He also praised
communities that came together in the aftermath of the summer's anti-immigrant riots,
saying: "I felt a deep sense of pride here in the United Kingdom when, in response to
anger and lawlessness in several towns this summer, communities came together, not to
repeat these behaviours but to repair." He added that this was "to repair not just buildings,
but relationships; and, most importantly, to repair trust."Sky
2025TBA TBACharles III
In the past, the Governor of Hong Kong , as the representative of the British monarch, played this role; the
tradition was carried on by the Chief Executive of Hong Kong  upon the territory's transfer of sovereignty
to China in 1997.
In 1931, Queen Wilhelmina of the Netherlands  delivered her first Christmas message on the airwaves,
which was also broadcast to the Dutch East Indies , Suriname  and the other Dutch West Indies  via
shortwave radio  station PCJJ . During the reign of her daughter Juliana , the Royal Christmas message was
to become an annual tradition.
Heads of state of other countries have adopted the tradition of a message at Christmas, including the King
of Sweden , the King of the Belgians , the Grand Duke of Luxembour g, the Prince of Liechtenstein , the
President of Germany , and the King of Spain . The Pope  makes a Christmas address as part of his Urbi et
Orbi .
The President of the United States  also gives out Christmas messages as part of the President's Weekly
Address . Some of these messages come out within a few days before Christmas or on Christmas Day. The
president may also give a Christmas message to soldiers serving in the U.S. Armed Forces . The
opposition party may also give out their Christmas messages as part of their response to the President's
weekly address. In addition, beginning in 1986, US President Ronald Reagan  and Soviet Union  general
secretary  Mikhail Gorbachev  exchanged televised New Year's Day addresses to the other's respective
nations. This exchange continued between President Geor ge H. W. Bush  and Gorbachev until the
dissolution of the Soviet Union .
The Prime Minister of Canada  records a short Christmas greeting.
Others have modified the practice by issuing a statement to coincide with the New Year; this is done by
the British Prime Minister , who issues a New Year message which extensively reflects on the last year
and the government's intentions in the new year. The Archbishop of Canterbury , spiritual leader of
the Anglican Communion , also gives a speech on New Year's Day .
Foreign leaders also carrying this tradition include:
the Governors-General of Canada , Jamaica , and New Zealand ;
the King of Denmark , the King of Norway , the Emperor of Japan , the Prince of
Monaco , the King of Thailand , and the Sultan of Brunei ;
the Presidents of Cameroon , China , Finland , France , Hungary , Iceland , Italy,
Ivory Coast , the Philippines , Poland , Portugal , Senegal , and the Russian
Federation ;
the Chancellor of Germany  and the Prime Ministers of Denmark  and Iceland .Similar  messages elsewher e
Other Christmas messages
New Year messages
The Yang di-Pertuan Agong  of Malaysia  makes speeches on his official birthday in June and on National
Heroes Day in July, while the Prime Minister of Malaysia  also makes speeches not only on New Year's
Day but also on the night of Eid ul-Fitr  and on the eve of Independence Day. The Prime Minister of
Singapore  addresses the nation  on the country's national day .
The King of Morocco  makes speeches on the anniversaries of his accession (Throne Day), the Revolution
of the King and the People  and the Green March .
Christianity portal
United Kingdom
portal
Canada portal
Australia portal
New Zealand portal
Belize portal
Jamaica portal
Tuvalu portal
Alternative Christmas message
Special address by the British monarch
Prime Minister's New Year message
Cadena nacional
1. "Queen's Christmas message: 30 things you didn't know about Her Majesty's annual
broadcast"  (https://www .telegraph.co.uk/news/0/queens-christmas-message-30-things-didnt
-know-majestys-annual/) . The T elegraph . 23 December 2016. Archived  (https://web.archive.
org/web/20200918085513/https://www .telegraph.co.uk/royal-family/0/queens-christmas-mes
sage-30-things-didnt-know-majestys-annual/)  from the original on 18 September 2020.
2. "Queen's Christmas message: Five things you didn't know"  (https://www .bbc.co.uk/newsrou
nd/50902266/) . BBC Newsround . 24 December 2019.
3. Switzer , Charles (20 December 2023). "Breaking Royal Tradition: King Charles Personally
'Writes Script' for His Upcoming Christmas Day Speech"  (https://www .theroyalobserver .com/
p/breaking-royal-tradition-king-charles-personally-writes-script-christmas-day-speech) .
Royal Observer . Retrieved 23 December  2023 .
4. "A Christmas Day staple"  (http://www .thewhig.com/2015/12/23/a-christmas-day-staple) .
Kingston Whig-Standard . 23 December 2015 . Retrieved 25 December  2015 .
5. "The BBC Story"  (https://www .bbc.co.uk/historyofthebbc/resources/factsheets/1920s.pdf)
(PDF) , BBC, retrieved 30 December  2009Other

————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————