Wedding of Princess Elizabeth and
Philip Mountbatten
Princess Elizabeth and Philip Mountbatten
after their wedding
Date 20 November 1947
Venue Westminster Abbey
Location London, England
ParticipantsPrincess Elizabeth (later Queen
Elizabeth II)
Sir Philip Mountbatten (later
Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh)
Elizabeth and Philip posing for
their engagement photo, 18
September 1947
Wedding of Princess Elizabeth and Philip
Mountbatten
The wedding of Princess Elizabeth and Philip
Mountbatten (later Queen Elizabeth II and Prince
Philip, Duke of Edinbur gh) took place on Thursday 20
November 1947 at Westminster Abbey  in London,
United Kingdom. The bride was the elder daughter of
King Geor ge VI and Queen Elizabeth  (later the Queen
Mother) as well as the heir presumptive  to the British
throne. Although Philip was born a prince of Greece
and Denmark , he stopped using these foreign titles on
his adoption of British nationality four months before
the announcement of their marriage. On the morning of
the wedding, he was made Duke of Edinbur gh, Earl of
Merioneth  and Baron Greenwich .
Elizabeth  and Philip  were second cousins once removed  (by descent
from Christian IX of Denmark  and Louise of Hesse-Kassel ) and third
cousins  (by descent from Queen Victoria  and Prince Albert ). Princess Elizabeth met Prince Philip in
1934, at the wedding of Philip's cousin Princess Marina of Greece and Denmark  to Prince Geor ge, Duke
of Kent , paternal uncle of Elizabeth, and again in 1937. After another meeting at the Royal Naval
College in Dartmouth  in July 1939, Elizabeth—though only 13 years old—fell in love with Philip andEngagement
they began to exchange letters. An entry in Chips Channon 's diary made reference to the future
marriage of Elizabeth and Philip as early as 1941, "He is to be our Prince Consort, and that is why he is
serving in our Navy ."
The couple became secretly engaged in 1946, when Philip asked King Geor ge VI for his daughter's hand
in marriage. The King granted his request, providing any formal engagement was delayed until
Elizabeth's 21st birthday the following April. Their engagement was officially announced on 9 July
1947. Philip proposed to Elizabeth with a 3-carat round diamond ring consisting of "a centre stone
flanked by 10 smaller pave diamonds." The diamonds were taken from a tiara that belonged to Philip's
mother , Princess Alice of Battenber g, and were also used to create a quatrefoil bracelet for Elizabeth.
The King gave his formal consent to the marriage in his British Privy Council , in accordance with the
Royal Marriages Act 1772 . The same was done in Canada at a meeting of the King's Canadian Privy
Council , with the chief justice of Canada , Thibaudeau Rinfret , standing in as deputy to the King's
representative, the governor general of Canada .[n 1]
Princess Elizabeth and Philip Mountbatten married at 11:30 GMT  on 20 November 1947 at Westminster
Abbey . Elizabeth became the tenth member of the royal family to be married at the Abbey .
Princess Elizabeth was attended by eight bridesmaids : Princess Margaret  (her younger sister), Princess
Alexandra of Kent  (her first cousin), Lady Caroline Montagu-Douglas-Scott (daughter of the Duke of
Buccleuch  and niece of the Duchess of Glouceste r), Lady Mary Cambridge  (her second cousin), Lady
Elizabeth Lambart (daughter of the Earl of Cavan ), Lady Pamela Mountbatten  (Philip's first cousin),
Margaret Elphinstone  (her first cousin), and Diana Bowes-L yon (her first cousin). Her cousins Prince
William of Gloucester  and Prince Michael of Kent  served as page boys . The bridesmaids wore wreaths
"in their hair of miniature white sheaves, Lilies and London Pride, modelled in white satin and silver
lame", while the pages wore Royal Stewart tartan kilts.
The best man was the Marquess of Milford Haven , the groom's maternal first cousin. The Marquess
was a grandson of Prince Louis of Battenber g and Princess Victoria of Hesse and by Rhine ; and a great-
great-grandson of Queen Victoria .
For her wedding dress, Elizabeth still required ration coupons  to buy the material for her gown , designed
by Norman Hartnell . The dress was "a duchesse  satin bridal gown with motifs of star lilies and
orange blossoms." Elizabeth's wedding shoes were made out of satin and were trimmed with silver
and seed pearl. Elizabeth did her own makeup for the wedding. Her wedding bouquet was prepared
by the florist M. H. Longman, and consisted of "white orchids  with a sprig of myrtle". The myrtle wasWedding
Venue
Bridal party
Wedding attire
The royal wedding ceremony inside
Westminster Abbeytaken from "the bush grown from the original myrtle in Queen Victoria 's wedding bouquet". The
bouquet was returned to the abbey the day after the service to be laid on the tomb of the Unknown
Warrior , following a tradition started by Elizabeth's mother at her wedding in 1923.
On the morning of her wedding, as Princess Elizabeth was dressing at Buckingham Palace  before leaving
for Westminster Abbey , her tiara snapped. The court jeweller , who was standing by in case of emer gency ,
was rushed to his work room by a police escort. Queen Elizabeth  reassured her daughter that it would be
fixed in time, and it was. Elizabeth's father gave her a pair of pearl necklaces , which had belonged to
Queen Anne  and Queen Caroline , as a wedding present. Her diamond and pearl cluster earrings were also
family heirlooms, passed down from Princess Mary  to Queen Mary 's mother the Duchess of Teck. On her
wedding day, Elizabeth realised that she had left her pearls at St James's Palace . Her private secretary ,
Jock Colville , was asked to go and retrieve them. He was able to get the pearls to the princess in time for
her portrait in the Music Room of Buckingham Palace.
As a lieutenant  in the Royal Navy , Philip wore his dress uniform which was adorned with his medal
ribbons and the star emblems of the Order of the Garter  and Order of the Redeemer . He also carried a
ceremonial sword, with which he later cut the wedding cake.
The royal parties were brought in large carriage processions,
the first with the Queen and Princess Margaret and later a
procession with Queen Mary . Philip left Kensington
Palace  with his best man, his maternal first cousin the
Marquess of Milford Haven . Princess Elizabeth arrived at
the Abbey with her father , the King, in the Irish State
Coach .
The ceremony was officiated by the Archbishop of
Canterbury , Geof frey Fisher , and the Dean of Westminster
Alan Campbell Don. The Archbishop of York, Cyril Garbett ,
delivered the sermon. The ceremony was recorded and
broadcast by BBC Radio  to 200 million people around the
British Empire and the world.
Like her mother's, Princess Elizabeth's wedding band was
made of Welsh gold. The ring was made from a nugget
of Welsh gold from the Clogau St David's mine, near Dolgellau; this nugget had been given to the then
Lady Elizabeth Bowes-L yon, and used to make her wedding ring and subsequently the wedding rings of
both of her daughters. The same nugget was later used to create the wedding rings of Princess Anne
and Lady Diana Spencer .Wedding service
Wedding ring
Princess Elizabeth and the Duke of
Edinburgh waving to the crowds from the
balcony of Buckingham PalaceWilliam Neil McKie , the Australian organist and Master of the Choristers at the abbey , was the director of
music for the wedding, a role he again filled at Elizabeth's coronation  in 1953. McKie also wrote a
motet  for the occasion, "We wait for thy loving kindness, O God". Psalm 67, "God be merciful unto us
and bless us", was sung to a setting by Sir Edward Cuthbert Bairstow . The anthem was "Blessed be the
God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ " by Samuel Sebastian Wesley ; the hymns were "Praise, my soul,
the king of heaven ", and "The Lord's my Shepherd " to the Scottish tune "Crimond" attributed to Jessie
Seymour Irvine , which was largely unknown in the Church of England  at the time. A descant  to
"Crimond" had been taught to Princess es Elizabeth and Margaret by a lady-in-waiting , Lady Margaret
Egerton; the music for the descant could not be found two days before the wedd ing, so the princesses and
Lady Margaret sang it to Sir William McKie, who wrote it down in shorthand. The service started with
a specially composed fanfare  by Arnold Bax and finished with Felix Mendelssohn 's "Wedding March ".
The abbey choir was joined by the choirs of the Chapel Royal  and St Geor ge's Chapel, Windsor .
Before the wedding, Philip renounced his Greek and Danish titles, converted from Greek Orthodoxy  to
Anglicanism  and adopted the style  "Lieutenant Philip Mountbatten", taking the surname of his mother's
British family . The day before the wedding, King Geor ge bestowed the style "Royal Highness " and,
on the morning of the wedding, 20 November 1947, he gave Philip the titles Duke of Edinbur gh, Earl of
Merioneth , and Baron Greenwich  of Greenwich in the County of London. Consequently , being
already a Knight of the Garter , between 19 and 20 November 1947 he bore the unusual style His Royal
Highness Sir Philip Mountbatten and is so described in the Letters Patent of 20 November 1947.
Upon their marriage, Elizabeth took the title of her husband and became Princess Elizabeth, Duchess of
Edinbur gh.
After the ceremony , Elizabeth and Philip then proceeded to
Buckingham Palace , where the couple waved to the crowds
from the balcony .
Their wedding breakfast was held in the Ball-Supper Room of
the Palace. The menu included Filet de Sole
Mountbatten, Perdreau en Casserole, and Bombe Glacee
Princess Elizabeth. Music was played by the string band
of the Grenadier Guards .
The official wedding cake was baked by London bakery
McV itie & Price . A fruitcake  made of four tiers, it
stood nine feet high, and weighed about 500 lbs. It was made with 80 oranges, 660 eggs, and over
three gallons of Navy Rum. As World War II had ended a mere two years earlier and certain things were
still subject to rationing, some of the ingredients used to make the cake were shipped to Britain fromMusic
Titles
Family celebrations
Wedding breakfast
around the world; this led to the cake being given the nickname "The 10,000 Mile Cake".
Decorations included the coats of arms of both the bride's and the groom's families, as well as the bride
and groom's individual monograms, and sugar -iced figures depicting regimental and naval badges, as
well as the couple's favourite activitie s. The couple cut the cake with the Duke of Edinbur gh's
Mountbatten sword, which had been a wedding gift from his father -in-law , the King.
The couple received over 2,500 wedding presents from around the world and around 10,000 telegrams of
congratulations. The gifts were put on public display at St James's Palace  and made available for
public viewing.
The day after the wedding the wedding bouquet  was returned to Westminster Abbey and placed on the
Tomb of the Unknown Warrior ; this tradition was initiated by the bride's mother , Queen Elizabeth ,
following her marriage  to the bride's father , then the Duke of York. The bouquet was composed of white
cattleya , odontoglossum , and cypripedium  orchids and a sprig of myrtle  from the Osborne Myrtle Bush,
which had been planted at Osborne House  by Queen Victoria  in 1846. The flowers in the bouquet
were supplied by the Worshipful Company of Gardeners and were arranged by florist MH Longman.
Refer ence:
The King  and Queen , the bride's parents
The Princess Margaret , the bride's sister
Queen Mary , the bride's paternal grandmother
The Duke  and Duchess of Gloucester , the bride's paternal uncle and aunt
Prince William of Gloucester , the bride's first cousin
Prince Richard of Gloucester , the bride's first cousin
The Duchess of Kent , the bride's paternal aunt by marriage (and the groom's first
cousin)
The Duke of Kent , the bride's first cousin
Princess Alexandra of Kent , the bride's first cousin
Prince Michael of Kent , the bride's first cousin
The Princess Royal 's family :
The Earl of Harewood , the bride's first cousin
The Hon. Gerald Lascelles , the bride's first cousin
The Earl of Southesk , widower of the bride's first cousin once removed
Lord Carnegie , the bride's second cousin
Princess Helena V ictoria , the bride's and the groom's first cousin twice removed
Princess Marie Louise , the bride's and the groom's first cousin twice removedWedding presents
Guests
Bride's family
Marriage certificate, signed by Philip,
Elizabeth, Elizabeth's father King George
VI, Elizabeth's mother Queen Elizabeth,
Elizabeth's grandmother Queen Mary,
Philip's mother Princess Andrew of
Greece and Denmark, Princess
Margaret, Prince Henry, Duke of
Gloucester, Princess Alice, Duchess of
Gloucester, Princess Marina, Duchess of
Kent, Lady Patricia Ramsay, Sir
Alexander Ramsay, Princess Alice,
Countess of Athlone, the Earl of Athlone,
Victoria, Marchioness of Milford Haven,
the Marchioness of Milford Haven, the
Archbishop of Canterbury, the Dean of
Westminster, the Countess Mountbatten
and Earl Mountbatten of Burma, the King
of Norway, the King of Romania, the
Queen and King of Denmark  
Elizabeth and Philip, along with
bridesmaids and family members, posing
for photographsLady Patricia  and The Hon. Sir Alexander Ramsay ,
the bride's and the groom's first cousin twice
removed and her husband
Captain Alexander Ramsay , the bride's and the
groom's second cousin once removed
The Earl of Athlone  and Princess Alice, Countess of
Athlone , the bride's paternal great-uncle and great-
aunt (also first cousin twice removed to the bride
and groom)
Lady May  and Henry Abel Smith , the bride's first
cousin once removed and her husband
Anne Abel Smith , the bride's second cousin
Elizabeth Abel Smith, the bride's second
cousin
The Marquess  and Marchioness of Cambridge, the
bride's first cousin once removed and his wife
Lady Mary Cambridge , the bride's second cousin
The Duchess  and Duke of Beaufort , the bride's first
cousin once removed and her husband
Lady Helena Gibbs , the bride's first cousin once
removed
The Lady  and Lord Elphinstone , the bride's maternal
aunt and uncle
Master of Elphinstone , the bride's first cousin
The Hon. Jean and Captain John Wills, the
bride's first cousin and her husband
The Hon. Andrew and Mrs Elphinstone, the
bride's first cousin and his wife
The Hon. Margaret Elphinstone , the bride's first
cousin
The Earl of Strathmore and Kinghorne , the bride's
maternal uncle
The Hon. Mrs John Bowes-L yon, the bride's
maternal aunt by marriage
Viscountess Anson , the bride's first cousin
Diana Bowes-L yon, the bride's first cousin
The Countess  and Earl Granville , the bride's
maternal aunt and uncle
Lady Mary Leveson-Gower , the bride's first
cousin
Lord Leveson, the bride's first cousin
The Hon. Michael  and Mrs Bowes-L yon, the bride's maternal uncle and aunt
The Hon. David  and Mrs Bowes-L yon, the bride's maternal uncle and aunt
Princess Andrew of Greece and Denmark , the groom's mother
The Dowager Marchioness of Milford Haven , the groom's maternal grandmother
The Crown Princess  and Crown Prince of Sweden , the groom's maternal aunt and uncle
(representing the King of Sweden )
The Marchioness of Milford Haven , the groom's maternal aunt by marriage
Lady Tatiana Mountbatten, the groom's first cousin
The Marquess of Milford Haven , the groom's first cousin  (also the best man)
The Earl  and Countess Mountbatten of Burma , the groom's maternal uncle and aunt
The Lady  and Lord Brabourne , the groom's first cousin and her husband
Lady Pamela Mountbatten , the groom's first cousin
The Queen  and King of Yugoslavia , the groom's first cousin, once removed, and her
husband, the bride and groom's third cousin
The Queen Mother of the Romanians , the groom's first cousin
The King of the Romanians , the groom's first cousin, once removed
The Queen of the Hellenes , wife of the groom's first cousin, also second cousin of the
groom  (representing the King of the Hellenes )
The Duchess of Aosta , the groom's first cousin
Lady Katherine and Major Richard Brandram , the groom's first cousin and her husband
Prince  and Princess George of Greece and Denmark , the groom's paternal uncle and aunt
Princess Dominic Radziwiłł , the groom's first cousin
The King  and Queen of Denmark , the groom's second cousin and his wife
The King of Norway , the groom's first cousin, once removed and the bride's paternal great-
uncle
Princess Axel of Denmark , the groom's second cousin (also wife of the groom's first cousin
once removed )
Prince Georg of Denmark , the groom's second cousin
Prince Flemming of Denmark , the groom's second cousin
Princess  and Prince René of Bourbon-Parma , the groom's first cousin, once removed and
her husband
Princess Anne of Bourbon-Parma , the groom's second cousin
Prince Michel of Bourbon-Parma , the groom's second cousin
The Marquess  and Marchioness of Carisbrooke , the groom's first cousin once removed and
the bride's first cousin twice removed, and his wife
Queen V ictoria Eugenie of Spain , the groom's first cousin once removed and the bride's first
cousin twice removed
The Count  and Countess of Barcelona , the groom's second cousin and his wife
The Hereditary Grand Duke of Luxembourg , the groom's third cousin once removed
(representing the Grand Duchess of Luxembourg )
Princess Elisabeth of Luxembourg , the groom's third cousin once removedGroom's family
Elizabeth and Philip on their honeymoonPrince Tomislav of Yugoslavia , the bride and groom's third cousin
Prince Andrew of Yugoslavia , the bride and groom's third cousin
The Prince Regent of Belgium  (representing the King of the Belgians )
Princess Juliana  and Prince Bernhard of the Netherlands  (representing the Queen of the
Netherlands )
The King of Iraq
The Duke of Windsor , the former king, was not invited, and his sister , the Princess Royal , did not attend
as she said she was ill (her husband, Henry Lascelles, 6th Earl of Harewood , had died six months before).
Ronald Storrs  claimed that the Princess Royal did not attend in protest over her brother's exclusion. So
soon after the end of World War II, it was not acceptable for the Duke of Edinbur gh's German relations,
including Philip's three surviving sisters, to be invited to the wedding.
The couple boarded a train to Hampshire  at London Waterloo
railway station , and spent their wedding night at the home of
the Duke of Edinbur gh's uncle, the Earl Mountbatten of
Burma , in Broadlands . From there the couple travelled
to Birkhall  on the Balmoral Estate , where they spent the
remainder of their honeymoon.
For her going-away outfit, Elizabeth wore "a dress and
matching coat in mist-blue with mushroom-coloured
accessories" that was designed by Hartnell.
1. George VI had invited Prime Minister of Canada  William L yon Mackenzie King  to attend the
meeting of the British Privy Council, but Mackenzie King declined and held the meeting of
the Canadian Privy Council so as to illustrate the separation between Canada's Crown  and
that of the UK .Others
Honeymoon
Notes
Footnotes
1. Brandreth, pp. 133–139; Lacey , pp. 124–125; Pimlott, p. 86
2. Bond, p. 10; Brandreth, pp. 132–136, 166–169; Lacey , pp. 119, 126, 135
3. Vickers, Hugo . Alice: princess Andrew of Greece  (https://books.google.com/books?id
=wRjPrbgR_SAC&q=Channon+%22He+is+to+be+our+Prince+Consort%22&pg=P A317) .
New York: St. Martin's Press . p. 317. ISBN  0-312-28886-7 .
4. Brandreth, p. 183
5. Heald, p. 77
6. Robinson, Katie . "The Untold Story Behind Queen Elizabeth's
Engagement Ring"   . Town & Country . Retrieved 15 May
2018 .
7. Anastasiou, Zoe . "This Is The Adorable Story Behind Queen Elizabeth's
Engagement Ring"   . Harper's Bazaar . Retrieved 15 May  2018 .
8. Boyce, Peter John . The Queen's Other Realms: The Crown and Its Legacy in
Australia, Canada and New Zealand . Sydney: Federation Press. p. 81.
ISBN  9781862877009 .
9. 60 Diamond W edding anniversary facts  (http://www .royal.gov .uk/LatestNewsandDiary/Factfil
es/60diamondweddinganniversaryfacts.aspx) , Official website of the British Monarchy , 18
November 2007 , retrieved 20 June  2010
10. "70 facts about The Queen and The Duke of Edinburgh's W edding"  (https://www .royal.uk/70
-facts-about-queen-and-duke-edinburghs-wedding) . www .royal.uk . 17 November 2017 .
Retrieved 15 June  2018 .
11. "Sixty facts about a royal marriage"   . BBC. 18
November 2007 . Retrieved 15 November  2018 .
12. Hoey , p. 58; Pimlott, pp. 133–134
13. "Elizabeth II's wedding"  (https://www .bbc.co.uk/history/events/elizabeth_iis_wedding) . BBC .
Retrieved 1 August  2018 .
14. "The Mirror"   . Daily Mirror . May 2011.
15. Field, pp. 41–43.
16. Field, pp. 104–105.
17. Davison, Janet. "The Royal W edding, decoded"  (https://www .cbc.ca/news2/interactives/roya
l-annotations/) . CBC . Retrieved 15 June  2022 .
18. "ROY AL: W edding of HRH Princess Elizabeth and Philip Mountbatten at W estminster
Abbey"   , ITN
Source , retrieved 13 January  2011
19. Heald, p. 86
20. "Markle's wedding ring expected to follow royal tradition of W elsh gold"  . Reuters. 21 March 2018. Archived from the original  (https://af.reuters.com/article/commo
ditiesNews/idAFL8N1R348R)  on 23 October 2018 . Retrieved 22 October  2018 .
21. "Gold of Royalty - British Royal Family and W elsh Gold"  (https://www .clogau.co.uk/aboutclo
gau/goldofroyalty .aspx) . Clogau . Retrieved 22 October  2018 .
22. Prior, Neil . "Welsh gold wedding ring continues royal tradition"   . BBC . Retrieved 22 October  2018 .
23. Wilkinson, James . The Queen's Coronation: The Inside Story . Scala Publishers Ltd.
p. 24. ISBN  978-1-85759-735-6 .
24. Glover , Raymond F , The Hymnal 1982 Companion: V olume Three B , The Church Hymnal
Corporation 1994  )
25. "Weddings: Elizabeth, Princess (later Queen Elizabeth II) & HRH the Duke of Edinburgh"  (ht
tp://www .westminster-abbey .org/our-history/royals/weddings/hm-queen-elizabeth-ii--and--hr
h-the-duke-of-edinburgh) , Westminster Abbey
26. Hoey , pp. 55–56; Pimlott, pp. 101, 137
27. "No. 38128"   . The London
Gazette . 21 November 1947. p. 5495.
28. Galarza, Daniela . "A Brief History of British Royal W edding Cakes"   . www .eater .com . Retrieved 15 June  2018 .
29. Timms, Elizabeth Jane . "Royal W edding Bouquets: The Osborne Myrtle
Bush"  (http://royalcentral.co.uk/blogs/royal-wedding-bouquets-the-osborne-myrtle-bush-100
090). Royal Central . Retrieved 14 June  2018 .
30. Helgeson, Kyla . "Royal W edding Flowers: W edding Bouquets and Trends
Throughout the Decades"  (https://www .tesselaarflowers.com.au/royal-wedding-flowers/) .
Tesselaar Flowers . Retrieved 14 June  2018 .
31. "A Royal W edding 1947"   . Archived from the original    on 31
December 2013.
32. Born Princess Katherine of Greece and Denmark, but renounced princely titles upon her
marriage in 1947.
33. Bradford, p. 424
34. Hoey , p. 59; Petropoulos, p. 363
Bond, Jennie  . Elizabeth: Eighty Glorious Years. London: Carlton Publishing Group.
ISBN  1-84442-260-7
Bradford, Sarah . King George VI . London: W eidenfeld & Nicolson. ISBN  0-297-
79667-4
Brandreth, Gyles  . Philip and Elizabeth: Portrait of a Marriage . London: Century .
ISBN  0-7126-6103-4
Field, Leslie . The Queen's Jewels: The Personal Collection of Elizabeth II . London:
Harry N. Abrams . ISBN  0-8109-8172-6 .
Heald, Tim . Princess Margaret: A Life Unravelled . London: W eidenfeld & Nicolson.
ISBN  978-0-297-84820-2
Hoey , Brian . Her Majesty: Fifty Regal Years. London: HarperCollins. ISBN  0-00-
653136-9
Lacey , Robert  . Royal: Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II . London: Little, Brown. ISBN  0-
316-85940-0
Petropoulos, Jonathan  . Royals and the Reich: the princes von Hessen in Nazi
Germany . New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN  0-19-516133-5
Pimlott, Ben  . The Queen: Elizabeth II and the Monarchy . London: HarperCollins.
ISBN  0-00-255494-1Refer ences
Order of Service for the wedding  
Sermon preached at the wedding  
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?
title=Wedding_of_Princess_Elizabeth_and_Philip_Mountbatten&oldid=1301549915"